A ball he fell as Tchatzki did.82
A ball here, there a children's treat,
A ball in Peter's capital,
Abandon cities riotous,
Abandoned he his country seat,
"Abandon hope for ever here!"38
Abandoning insane delight,
A bastard fame prohibited?
Abuse their masters, rub their hands:
A careless looker-on estranged
A bristly bear of monstrous size!
accommodated for the night, or indeed for as many nights
A child devoid of childishness
A bearded postillion astride
A beauty languidly at rest,
A bill of fare hangs full in sight
A blood-bespattered shade would rise,
A bottle of a vintage white
A boat with splashing oar floats by,
above the 7th hereditary rank is acquired. In the remaining
Above the humble urn of death.
Above the yawning grave would fight,—
A beau is for Tattiana found!
A blessed bottle, placed in ice,
A bogy conjured up in joke,
A book at early morn perused.
About the crop of hay, the wine,
About the rain and flax and cattle."—
Above the ashes of the dead.
A box of terrible import.
A breathless silence then, prolonged—
Absorbed in melancholy mood
A canine face with horns thereon,
A case of books he doth obtain—
Accelerates her hasty pace,
Accents of rapture or despair
according to the forms of the Eastern Church. See Note 28.
account of the bard and his creations will be found in the
A coquette loves by calculation,
A certain little escapade
A constant harping on one tune,
a circumstance which perhaps accounts for the southern fervour of
A countenance perplexed and scared.
Across the stage still madly sweep,
A charm with it in conversation.
A country damsel's album trim,
Address to you one single phrase
A dove which on a lyre doth sit;
A duellist of classic mind,
A due which must to earth be paid.
Afar, where clothed in green and gold
A feeble version read below,
Affectionately yours till death.
affectionate regard of the youthful Pushkin when a student
A flimsy trace of musings past
Acquaintance instantly to make.
A crab upon a spider rides,
A critic of the stage malicious,
Across her youth a shade had come,
Across the smiling face of dawn.
A cup of tea upon a tray.
A dagger, asterisk, or note
A dangerous, gloomy misanthrope,
addressed the following impromptu to his friend's portrait:
A deadly pallor, air distressed;
Adieu she to the matron said
Adieu, thou witness of our glory,
Adieu! whate'er thou didst desire
A dinner, whimsical each course,
Adorned the apartment of Eugene,
Adorned with many a vision bright
A double force unto their song
A dreadful sleep Tattiana sleeps.
Adroitly seized and carried her;
A dwarf adorned with tail, again
A dying man with art to soothe,
A faithful friend to friends, of ladies torturer,
Afar is borne by cruel fate,
A few of different temper deemed,
Again a century should scourge
A fiery, yet well-broken horse,
A first success light pinions gave,
A fond and careful mother been.
A forest now she sees in front
against the verst-posts as if against a palisade!
A game of chess would often play,
A fragile bridge and insecure,
A friendly hand thy life hath ta'en!
Against my inclination, friends,
A gambling troop when he controlled,
Agreed! but then the whirl of fashion,
A hand of ice appeared to seize62
A happy destiny ordained:
Ah! brethren, what was my delight
"Ah! come, Tattiana, come to me!
A heavy goose on scarlet feet,
Ahem! Ahem! My reader noble,
A hemisphere beneath her sway,
A hermit's life Oneguine led,
Ah! I'm so weak—my throbbing breast!
Ah! I still struggle to forget
"Ah! nurse, a favour do for me!"—
A horse's hoofs she hears—She shrinks!
A hundred times will not repeat,
Ah! than a spectre from the dead
A joyous troop of little boys
A Kalmuck gray, in caftan rent
Alarmed by jealous agonies:
Alas! abroad I cannot go.
Alas! It is not hard to guess.
Alas! life's hours which swiftly fly
Across the Baltic's salt sea waves,
Across the gloom of heaven would sail
A curious interest disclose
"Adieu! thou home where peace abides,
Admired his judgment, which was fine,
admiration. He was an officer in the Hussars of the Guard, and
Admirer of the peaceful Muse,
A door he opens. But why shrank
"Advance!"—
A faithful model she appeared
A friar black approaching near,50
A hidden train of wild desire.
After the wedded couple strain;
A jolly song and distant horn;
Again imagination blazed,
A garden by a shining rill.
A kerchief round her silver hair
Ah! what hath fate not torn away!
aims a stroke at the pedantic and narrow-minded criticism to
Akulka who was once Celine,
A labour, torment, yet a joy,
A lancer captivates her heart!
A lancer her soul dotes upon:
Affection how did you requite?
A fiery and eccentric mind,
A finished madrigal would frame
A fop, in dress pedantical.
Again her rural life she sought,
A grammar, likewise Petriads two,
A gust of passion never tore
"Alas! dear nurse, my heart is cleft,
Alas! my stomach it betrays
Alas! she is as hard, behold,
Alas! Tattiana fades away,
Alas! the friend of childish days
Alas! the youthful lover slain,
Alas! with merited reproach.
Albums magnificent which scare
A lethargy of sense, a trance,
A lean and shaggy nag doth ride,
Alike by sighs and flattery.
"Aline!"
A life in common with the rest;
A life of fact, not fiction, led—
A little farther please to read
A little Juvenal to spout,
All about Olga—to a light
All breathless and without replies.
All hail! my good old friend Bordeaux!
All mothers their sweet girls believed
All Nature winter seemed to await,
All slumber. In the drawing-room
All sons of mental weariness.
All so distinct, and all so white!
All that a poet could desire,
All that industrial London brings
All that the heart would fain express—
All the young people round about,
All this I know is out of date,
Again in her ethereal dance?
Again the giddy waltz repeats.
Again the plague of boyhood—love?
Age immature averse to cheat—
agreeable than its prototype "Leonora," inasmuch as the whole
A heart wherein pure passion burnt;
Ah! he has gone the other way"—
Ah! how Tattiana was transformed,
A hidden meaning could impart,
Ah! it may be, affection true
"Ah! long the world hath missed thy shape!
Ah no! no faintness her attacked
"Alack! Tattiana," she replied,
Alas! for now before her passed
Alas! he loved as in our times
A journey to Moscow! To see the world!
A lady draws the hostess near,
A lady's hand doth never kiss.
Alarm the winter journey gave.
Alas! how wretched now my lot!"
"Alas! my friend, no revenue!"
Alas! my friends, the years flit by
A letter for her hero meant:
A little virgin mirror peeps.
All are amazed; but Lenski he
All are constrained and fetters bear,
All arise. To the door he goes.
All bustle when he makes a sign:
All covered up with snow in heaps,
All dark and silent hath become;
All in the good old style appears,
All rattled in the ball-room vast,
All to the doctors Eugene send,
All to the grand saloon are gone—
All vanished as an echo goes.
All is foreseen. My secret drear
All overtures of friendship ended.
All silently hung down his head.
All that perfection could desire;
All this in many cases brings
All the creations which below
All this may be an empty dream,
All this, my friends, translate aright:
All this was novel to Eugene.
Allure the young gallant
All visited him at first, of course;
All which caprice and affluence craves,
All which in Paris eager taste,
All with urbanity betray,
Almost became a poet say—
Alone amid possessions great,
Alone beneath your rooftree stay
Alone the princess sitteth there,
Alone within his habitation
Alone with my Venetian maid,
A lover's letter might convey,
A love which knew no limitation,
Also my wretched liberty
Also the works of Fontenelle,
Although we read him heaps of verse.
Amid a serious disputation,
Amid coquettes who pray to God
Amid sly, pusillanimous
Amid submissive herds of men
Alone she gallops on her steed,
Along the Neva's bank he sleighs,
Already Autumn chilled the sky,
Already crisp hoar frosts impose
Already dance to song proceeds;
Always together, eventide
Ambassador bought and presented him to Peter the Great who caused
A love epistle he doth scrawl.
Already he grew phthisical.
Alterius facti culpa silenda mihi est."
Although the destined coffin nears,
Although unknown to fame mayhap,
A maid hath oft, may yet again
A mansion—by the window, see!
Amid the awful emptiness
A loaded pistol in his hand.
A load of care upon the maid.
Alone beside it, gray and bent,
Along the hall, and high above
Alone he doth his claret drink,
Along Saint Petersburg's paved streets,
Already by repentance moved
Already sings the nightingale.
Also one Viázemski, remarking
Amazed at the confusing crowd,
Amid the soulless sons of pride
A modern Regulus unchained,
Among some ancient ballads thrust,
Also their feet—yet ne'ertheless
Also thy rough-and-tumble fights,
Also, to equalise the scales,
A mild quotation to translate,
A mournful temper on his Muse.
Although her book did not contain
An album, fly-leaf of the tome,
Although we know that Eugene had
Am I to go through the whole list?"
An ace at fifteen paces bored.
An ardent heart and yet so mild?—
an author of promise—unfulfilled.
And a boy handed round the cream.
And a determined disposition,
And after Albion's proud lyre 20
And a grand festival proceeds.
And a guitar produced we see,
Although it will not bear translation,
A maiden's secrets—of the heart.
A marriageable maid matured,
Amber on pipes from Stamboul glows,
Amidst successes flattering
Amid the company career.
Amid the snowdrifts which surround
A moment effervescing stirs,
And after them at headlong pace
A mien unaltered she preserved,
A million bipeds reckons thus
Amy Petrovnautters lies,
An almanac but eight years old.
An ancient lady full of grace.—
And about dawn upon his breast
And abject slaves who kiss the rod;
And "Agathon" replied, amazed.53
And agitate my heart again;
And also fashionable beaux.
And also that my feeble verse—
And ancient usages observed
And an habitual sense of pain;
And an encouragement did breathe
And boiling o'er with friendly heat,
And, by the way, I here assert
And cannot anything conceal,
And deem the world perfection is!
And distance interposed in vain,
And dream of life's delightful dawn?
And ease and fashionable waste,—
And Eugene soon discovered there
And eye which gleams with inspiration—
And at the table sat her down.
And beats with rapid foot the floor.
And blest me, sinking to the grave.78
And by a partial temper stirred
And education runs to waste,
And farewell thou, my gloomy friend,
And female tears hysterical,
And finally he deigns let fall
And for a time our course delay,
And from his dressing-room would pass
And full of innocent delight,
And glasses unemployed all night;
And a half rubles down gave she;
And aimless journeys did commence—
And all in snow is buried deep.
And all that from thy hand proceeds—
And all the joys which Winter knows.
And all the three to breakfast went;
And all thy precious elegies,
And all with one accord agreed,
And all without her husband's leave.
And all your love on self bestow;
And a long time about her talked.
And alphabetically tries
And a malicious epigram
And an elegiac poem wrote.
And an old gent the poet marking
And a romance in ancient style
And as a country damsel roved,
And beckon to the passing sails.
And at economy was great;
And at the stages bugs and fleas
And barely visible the smoke
And bends her mirror on the moon,
And be as happy—as I might.
And be not in advance severe.
And better, if I judge aright;
And bitter tears of fright I shed.
And bitter torment never known.
And blush to own himself reflect.
And by a genuine sorrow stirred,
And by the fiddle's rushing sound
And chattering loud sit down to dine.
And Comet champagne foaming flows.
And consolation soon begot.
And dark and drear the evenings were,
And death before the husband wide
And an enchanting shoulder shines
And a new diadem supplied.28
And at the altar of their fame
And bless mankind with full delight.
And blest the shadows of the night.
And by a sweet delusion he
And, by the light the moonbeams gave,
And care but little for its ends.
And comfort of each country dame,
And calmly sleeps the hours away,
And dames of fine organisations,
And ditties of the steppe she loved.
And due precautions take betimes.
And enmity and hope and love—
And far removed from rumour vain;
And fashion's gay frivolities;
And fled afar—she followed me.
And Fliànoff, pensioned councillor,
And flowed harmoniously. He took
And following them ye might espy
And gave himself but little pain
And gazed around with eyes of flame;
And hat surnamed a "Bolivar"6
And like Napoleons each of us
And linen on him doth bestow.
And gossip of the town and fashion
And gradually day unfolds.
And grasps a pen: his verse, albeit
And had with waddling in the end
And hates the world's discordant ways.
And grant his weary bones their rest
And grant success to labour long;
And grasp a stirrup fortunate—
And harmony was soon restored.
And Heavens! warbled forth we hear:
And, heaving a regretful sigh,
And irrigate them with champagne;
And heedless of approval seems,
And if Tattiana mine had found—
And her bespangled robe doth wave
And in her languid bosom raise
And, joy of souls effeminate,
And judgment which unsteady veers
And leaning 'gainst the portal closed
And life and fate in turn selected
And like Childe Harold gloomily
And lo! he is already there!
And long her eyes as through a haze
And marvels deemed he thus should view.
And mental elasticity.
And Moscow many a beauty fair:
And my Tattiana now began
And now his youthful heart desires
And oft in whispers would impart
And now philanthropy his soul,
And now she skips and now she springs
And numerous pages had preserved
And pauses oft to serve out bread.
And pleasure's daily blandishment,
And she to whom my lyre would fain,
And spouted it with lyric fire—
And supper. In the country we
And the lone secret of her heart,
And these the attentive maid observed
And, though a plucky scatterbrain,
And turned aside the drapery;
And vanish like a bird in air.
And Schiller read by candlelight.
And to revive Tattiana seemed.
And usually despised it too,
And various chords upon it proves,
And what will Destiny concede?"
And views amongst themselves advance
And with emotional delight
A new Kaverine Eugene mine,
Angel or fiend malevolent.
Anicia soon appears, the door
A nursling yet for Hope to school.
an ode, "To Her," which commences thus:
A pair; though desolate my mind,
A passing snowstorm wreathed away
A pillar by, two aunts betwixt,
A pleasure though with sorrow knit:
And lonely through the forest creeps."
And oft its Dictionary thumb.13
And rapid whirl of many feet,
And the cast-iron statuette
And think: here lies who loved me well,
And through the lofty windows views
And turned to leave immediately,
And to the Bourse the cabman plies;
An ever transcendental flight;
And wakened him with the loud cry:
And where Thalia softly dreams
A new world was made manifest!
Another time, so willed it Fate,
Approach, approach; I am thine own."
A prudent man like you and brave
Are admirable, my dear friend,
Are oft deceptive—like their feet.
Are ye replaced by other maids
Arising with the morning's light,
Around the carriage of the pair—
A Russian in Childe Harold's cloak,
A scant attendance Lenski showed
A riding whip. She strolls along.
As a babe's slumber, or the light
As cyphers others to appraise,
A sense of social delight,
As hope uncertain and as sweet,
Aside the foes their mantles threw,
As in some frenzied dream of fear
As it were, tore himself away.
As many dinners I rehearse,
As oft to meat and drink advert,
As the reflection of his age,
As thoughts which gentle maidens have,
As thou, great Homer, didst of yore,
Asunder was and hate prepared?
As yet none had discovered aught;
A strong resemblance these possess—
As your light footprints on the green.
At early morn returns the maid
At first for books was disinclined,
At first such contradictions wrought
At home arriving he addressed
Attentive be unto my rhymes
At the front gates, but in brief space
At neighbouring hospitalities.
Attend in male attire arrayed.
Attentive listened to the lad.
A village and beneath, a wood,
A visionary personage
Away! and cease to ring their praise
A wild enthusiastic tongue,
Away, Tattiana, hath been ta'en.
A young Armida's lips to press,
Back to his regiment must roam.
Because he could not gourmandise
Before a cold indifferent crowd,
Before he eighteen years attained.
Before such fond simplicity
Behind the mountain sank the moon.
Being from hell or heaven sent,
Beneath the silver of the moon
Beneath the table-cloth of white,
Beneath the window-sill his bed,
Beside his Olga doth he grieve,
Beside the stormy sea one day
And both of dull existence tired,
And breathe a drama in his ear.
And breathes upon the chilly glass,
And breathe the balmy breath of night;
And brooding o'er the ills he bore,
And buried deep in meditation,
And by degrees upon him grew
And by that shady rivulet
And by the world repeated oft,
And can it be? But late a child
And cares not farther to proceed;
And Christian folk will, I expect,
And contemplative dreaminess;
And clad in airy costume took
And cool sagacious mind he had:
And cried within myself: 'tis he!
And courtier, fop, and usurer
And crossed with trembling hand the maid.
And cry: he was a poet great!
And devastate the woods around.
And ease the tortures of the heart—
And disappear in space; then she
And dost thou know her?"—"We live near."
And elbows on the table they
And endless the cotillon seemed
And Eugene ever in her soul
And every morning I awake
And every year distributed
And exclamations interlaced.
And finally, upon his bed
And fits of coughing racked her chest.
And for Tattiana, mournful maid,
And freezing fits of weariness.
And from the country all around
And exclamations and good cheer.
And fashionable magazines,
And fields my joys have ever been;
And Fliànoff, somewhat indisposed,
And flooded all the level ground.
And form a network left and right;
And from the Millionaya afar19
And from the misty woodland nigh
And frosty as a Twelfth Night cold.
And gallicisms I love as well
And galloped home. But pistols twain,
And gallops to her house away.
And handsome countenance combined,
And happy unto you appear.
And hark! the clank of spurs is heard
And hated casual visitors,
and if the simple Làrinas required such ample store of creature
And isolated from all men,
And jolting jarred the window-frames.
And since I pulled thee by the ear—
And thus he never fell among
And gently hovered o'er my head?
And glittering simpletons beside;
And gloomy epigrams malicious.
And golden Autumn draweth nigh,
And grown more curious by far
And many another slily sneered;
And of the irksome harness tires,
And Tania's husband soon appeared.—
And you, my youthful damsels fair,
Antiquity no pleasure gave,
Approaches Olga and the pair
Assuredly should not have been
And ought he not to disregard
As if with eider-down is filled.
And testy gamesters do engage
At first, but soon became inured
And still the coachmen round the fires11
A timid, shrinking love to grieve.
A white and undulating pall
Basins and jugs—well! everything
Because a member I became.
Begins to talk of this and that,
Behold! beside their dwelling groups
Behold! green tables are brought forth,
Behold! the world's opinion!63
Besides, a duellist well-known
Books he abandoned like the fair,
And I to give thee cakes was wont?"—
And pallid nature trembling grieves,
And this fifth canto ought to be
And though perchance a lady may
A new proprietor arrived,
An innate love of meditation,
Baggage is heaped up in a mound,
At eighteen not to play the fool!
Black curls which to his shoulders hung.
Both were expectant of the hate
Bouyànoff courted. She refused.
Bouyànoff whisked off Poustiakova.
Brilliant, ethereal, there springs
But at her shriek ran forth with noise
But by fantastic dreams distraught,
Another visit hastes to pay.
As deaf and silly doth remain,
As giddy youth's hilarity—
A worshipper of Kant, a bard,
A young and handsome galliard.
A trifle pale, a trifle lean,
A victim decked with golden leaves;
Between the stalls, along the toes;
Both for the nails and for the tushes.
"But," cried Zaretski in amaze,
But Eugene long hath left the press
But fashionable hatred's flame
But followed the strict rules of art,
Both were of passion satiate
Bullets are down the barrels pressed,
But even thus not now-a-days!
But finally he oped his eyes
But fools—their calumnies and sneers"—
But grown familiar side by side
But I am now another's bride—
But in the drawing-room all appeared
But it grew late; cold blew the gale;
But kindness from his eye had beamed
But Lenski, having no desire
Breakfast the busy cooks prepare,
But lo! his braggart neighbour hath
"But, mátushka, to Moscow you70
But man of sense and probity.
But memory like a serpent's tooth
But more the passions occupy
But my Tattiana's eyes were dry.
But nothing changed in them is seen,
But now all doubt was set aside,
But nowhere can she find repose,
But now our hero we must leave
But once more pensive and distressed
But plainer girls they oft had seen.
But scarce had maids their saucers ta'en
But trembles, words he cannot find,
But turning morning into night,
But scarce had sleep's soft witchery
But since to the backdoor they led
But such is not my project now,
But Summer swiftly fades away
But Tania just as in a dream
But Tania's heart is not at ease,
But tell me what am I to do?
But this a heinous crime appeared
But ultimately doth approach.
But was our friend Eugene content,
But when two minutes she had sat,
By computation it is like
Callous to all he seemed to be.
Callous to all on earth become—
Came forth in all her magic sheen.
Can count the time without much fuss—
By love's inevitable flame.
"Can I inspect the mansion, please?"
Cannot they amicably smile
Carried away by ecstasy,
And, hanging down her head, the maid
And hastened to his uncle's side,
And heard a voice cry—Why! He's killed!—
"And he—but of him presently—
And herds of oxen wandering low;
And his strange conduct at the dance
And hot with jealous indignation,
And impiously should declare,
And in reality one day
And, inspiration firing me,
And irritates the appetite.
And like a palisade flit by.72
And like the prisoner's our delight
And not a speck of dirt descried.
And now we hear delightedly
And o'er the granite coping bent,
And scanned in silence its content.
And mourned him still. Why mourn his fate?
And our swift troikas never tire;
And so departed. But Eugene,
And the recesses of my mind
And when the watery mirror gleamed
An explanation: she was scared,
And kindness Tania was impressed,
And lessons to his children read.
And like his shadow dogged his life,
And my dark soul to light was brought;
And more imagination teems.
And now a fickle flirt and wild,
And pressed her hand—the crimson blush
And satisfied with vengeance ta'en.
And seek in buzzing swarms the meads.
And sometimes into snares as well
And spectacles, his knitting staid
And stoves of various shapes abound.
And the conviction soon arose,
And the newcomers welcome bade.
And then made merry pope and guest,
And the saloon threw open wide;
And thou, persistent to the end,
And to Oneguine far away
And soon Oneguine's door beside
And well-instructed to betray!
And what the old man might bequeath.
And wished to say to him farewell.
And with his lot in life content,
And youthful madness, youthful fires.
An inn at every stage erect.
Another his betrothed was given;
A philosophic anchorite:
are a prolonged twilight.
As on the rapid wings of thought
Assigned a lodging, from the hall61
A stable, kitchen, fence appeared.
And to the field of honour led;
And true, his pistol's faultless aim
And visit many a foreign clime,
A new acquaintance we must scan.
An hour passed by—another—till,
An invalid from lung complaint.
A pair of bullets—nought beside—
a palisade, would instantly recognize its Yankee extraction.
Appear; along the road of Tver
Around my stanzas incomplete
Aroused Tattiana from her bed.
As bees who leave their dainty store
As daylight glimmers, darkness flits,
as desired, within the house of the entertainer. This of
as descriptive of the sensation of extreme cold. Mr. Wallace
As men who much had done that day.
As if impossible it were
As if some troubled dream she dreamed.
As lordly mansions ought to be,
astonish the mistress of a modern Belgravian mansion.
A street running parallel to the Neva, and leading from
As with innumerable fires.73
At an old aunt's they had arrived
A thick immense neglected grove
At times talk nonsense with design;
At times to silence would resort,
Awaiting on the shore I roam
Balconies, lion's heads on doors,
Because he yawned at the bare view
Bedding is laid out and to all
Behind the mill. Meantime ye see
Beneath a cross and shrubbery.
At womankind he growled a curse,
A valuable hostage gained,
Before a fire which feebly glows
Before it ran a stream. Behold!
Beneath acacias, cherry-trees,
Beneath her lay a strange courtyard,
"Behold my friend Monsieur Guillot;
Beneath her roaring opened wide:
Both ducks and geese in plenty bred
Boulevards, belfries, milliners,
Bouyànoff, wrathful cousin mine,
But, after mutual compliments,
But ah! discerns nor wood nor mead—
Between myself and my Eugene,
Bright day will then begin to burn,
But Eugene, incontestably,
But, as I said, Zaretski mine
But now a question in this wise
But now, what wretched roads one sees,
But of this love, e'en casually,
But one buffoon unhappy deemed
But, ere he mounts the marble flight,
But first permission did request
But grant with magnanimity
But presently she tried to read;
But proudly in his song preserved
But from the Muses' loftiest height
But, her own room in memory,
But soon their choice seemed to her mind
But sweeter in a midnight dream
By Tania, smoothing his peruke,
By their own horses, not the post—
But stares into the darkness deep.
But the dark sepulchre I may
But they draw near. Before them, lo!
But time flies and she doth forget
But yet Terpsichore bespeaks
By an obrok's indulgent rate:23
By many a lamp illuminate,
By the sick lady's gaiety
Cartel, or challenge to a fight,
cast-iron handles which adorn the porte cochères. The
Cast a gay lustre on the snow,
Caucasus, the latter, The Fountain of Baktchiserai. The
Charming with grave simplicity.
China and bronze the tables weight,
Choosing a profitable trade,
Change of position had essayed,
Charms more enduring in the end.
circumstances may be easily imagined which, under such a
Cocked hat and melancholy brow.69
combined with amiability and strict morality; also a species of
Combs of all sizes, files of steel,
Come rumbling up the neighbouring roads,
Conduct Tattiana constantly,
Come to my golden palace, dear!25
Confessions de J. J. Rousseau
Contemplate her sad reverie.
Contend with knife and fork and platter,
comforts the impediments accompanying a great noble on his
Compassion now or wrath inspires
Conceitedly on Tania fair,
continues to the present day, Russian families were wont to
Conventionality's dull tool—
Blest be the labours of the light,
Bokharians, peasants, beds of greens,
brothers made his way to Constantinople and thence to St. Petersburg
But as to fighting—'twill appear!
But better loved the soft repose
But Fortune cast our lots apart
But he who by the Muse was nursed
But I must add to what I write
But in his heart dissatisfied,
But Eugene, hating litigation
But I, in love, was mute and dull.
But lights incendiary flames
But my Tattiana, on my soul,
But on the third of grove and mead
But still more stupid did appear
But, to his uncle's mansion flown,
But were it not immoral I
"But death from him will be delight.
But one thought only filled his mind,
But to Vladimir Eugene saith:
But will not modify a tittle—
By Olga stood, dejected quite
Canto The Second
CANTO THE SECOND
CANTO THE SIXTH
But where Melpomene doth rave
But you must both be quite tired out!
By what idea or observation
Cards, balls, routs, poetry or fêtes;
Chief rascal, pot-house president,
Canto the First of this romance.
Canto The Sixth
city of the Tsars. There are three hundred and seventy churches in
completely plated with gold and some twelve hundred spires most of
Condemned to exile dire by fate,
conflagration which broke out in all quarters of the city. He
Contented and with victuals stored,
course is the poet and prince, Pushkin's friend.
Cousin, rememb'rest Grandison?"
Cunning already to display
Debate commanded ample food—
Delighted much his former ways
But it grew late; he must not stay;
corsair, and carried a slave to Constantinople. The Russian
Could not conceive how serious Grimm
Could taste the pleasures of the road.
courier sent by Prince Potemkin to the Empress drove so
Custom the despot soon prevails.
course is rendered necessary by the great distances which
Cried the old dame with anguish filled:
Crunching the morning snow she treads;
Crushing and a confusing noise;
Curtly announcing for the fray
Daily beefsteaks and Strasbourg pies
Dared calmly cleanse his nails 'fore him,
Dark clouds before the north wind fly;
Dark was the valley and the wood
Deep in our mother Earth's chill breast!"
Deep in the greenwood far away?
Delicious nature, thee I fly,
Delighted, almost sane in mind.
"Departed Lenski here to dine
Departed, ordered out his horse
Depart in peace and friendly live?
Descends, the order Guillot gives,
Describe in detail the affair,
Descried before me suddenly!
des tasses de blanc sur la toilette, mais sur ce qu'entrant un
Destiny hath preserved his lay.
Detest him for a brother slain?
devant moi. Je jugeai qu'un homme qui passe deux heures tous les
Devoured them with an eager zest.
Diana's bosom, Flora's cheeks,
And he had made her heart beat quick!
And her upon the threshold laid.
And her voice sweeter than the sounds
And he waits dinner. Lenski comes,
And he who, jealousy disarmed,
And his poor basten sandal knits.
And hoofs and crooked snouts and paws,
And honestly 'tis my belief
And husbands' tedious amity?
And I admired their common sense
And homeward like an arrow tore.
And hurried home his awful freight.
And I, amid the friendly crowd,
And I confess that now-a-days
And I discerned through Fancy's prism
And in addition youth is flame
And in a vision, sinless, bright,
And in a whisper did repeat:
And in her conversation drawled.
And in her grasp the letter shakes,
And in her native language she
And in society might shed
And in the bathroom did command
And in the final tome we learnt,
And in the frosty night alone
And in the morning doth not know
And I, remembering Svetlana,54
And is all light within destroyed?
And in her hand a French romance.
And in the Summer Garden rove.
And Kniajnine, apt at copying.
and is believed to have edited Foy's "History of the Peninsular
And led me off to church with song."
"And is it long since back he came?
And like a shadow haunted her.
And it may be a secret dread
and Malinniki.
And many a caravan on high
And lo! where lies a marble tomb
And madrigals I'm asked to write!
And my Eugene the path must trace—
And now 'tis night, the guardian moon
And on the footstool sitting down
And on the last one, underlined:
And pelt him with cherries,
"And is it," meditates Eugene.
"And is it she? It must be—no—
And is it true and not a jest,
And is it true her garland bright
and is vainly reproved for such blasphemy by her mother.
And jests doth recapitulate.
And leans upon the monster's arm,
And leads a solitary life?
And Lenski, closing his left eye,
And love's delicious diadem
And leave a marsh the fertile ground
And loves you as—a relative!
And Lenski followed—a light broke—
And lo! five paces more they pass,
And may fall headlong any time.
And naked uniformity.
And meditative from the spot
And no ridiculous report,
And past the threshold of decay,
and physiologist of eminence. His principal works are a "Traite
And privileges nice allowed,
And read De Pradt or Walter Scott!47
And reads with rapid eager eye
And roofs near morn blanched o'er with snow;
And rest from bygone days of strife.
And sallied forth one brilliant morn—
And saying this Vladimir drained
and secondly to "Eda," by Baratynski, a poem descriptive of life
And shall adopt some new caprice.
And she despite herself would waste
And shorter had the days become.
And showed with an uncertain light
And shut him in a lonely nook.
And, sobbing at your feet, to blend
And solitude and calm delight.
And silently I here must die—
And so—God bless them, if He list.
And so my noon hath come! If so,
And so Tattiana was her name,
And spur my spirit's torpid mood!
And starting suddenly doth say:
And stupid censors passionate;
And supercilious dames she glides,
And such unconsciously he led,
And tears of reconciliation:
And terrify a swarm of ducks,
And that a bottle sealed with tar
And the attendants called in haste.
And Limburg cheese alive and old
And long internal agitation
And long perukes hath vanishèd.
And make a dark existence shine
And my romance's open theme
And natural benevolence,
And never was the ear affright
And meditative homeward goes,
And necessary fools allowed.
And never hath our language proud
And now, I mournfully confess,
And now upon the snow in thaw
And nothing more important sees;
And now he views forgotten foes,
And oh! what verses, what delights,
And overcome antipathies
And physic bring with mournful face,
And platitudes and pedantry,
And read our newspapers scarce ever,
And ringing wine-glasses are plied.
And secretly their views expound.
And slowly life coagulates—
And soon imagination threw
And soon Lel hovered o'er her head.55
And stay whose length none recollects.
And solitude and calm delight,
And straight returning whence he came,
And that no longer could inspire.
And that unrivalled paragon,
And the bad book accompanies.
And the cold beauties of the season:
And the dark fringe of men, like frames
And the extent of his caprice;
And the fair sex as light as down!
And the far mountains daintily
And the kind-hearted servitors:
And the lime alley's twilight dim
And many a day thereafter laid
And marking Tania's agitation,
And modest, cheerful as the morn,
And oft at eventide a throng
And of the attic. Honestly,
And others rise ephemeral!
And our successors soon shall drive
And reached, with nought his mind to engage,
And rising from her bench proceeds;
And ruthless fashion hath blackballed.
And sermon—but in that dread hour
And she at last hath us deceived;
And silent as the maid Svetlana30
And soon the friendly troop hath fled.
And sulked in silent indignation;
And swifter than the swallow's flight.
And that too often we receive
And the eternal lorgnette through
And the heart's agitated dreams.
And then a cup of coffee drank,
And the more surely we ensnare
And then "monsieur" supplied her place;3
And then she soon 'twixt work and leisure
And then to meditate for days
And then the stanzas of my theme
And then with blind credulity
And the old nurse a brief prayer said
And the sagacious Triquet back
And the Skatènines, aged pair,
And the suspicious veteran old,
And the world met her smilingly,
And the young damsel from the town,
And this the faithful one allows,
And thou, from whom Tattiana sweet;
And thoughtlessness to woe might lead."
And thoughts of Olga first impressed
And thus he spent eight years of time,
And thus in season the rich field
And thy protection I implore.
And to these letters and these tears.
And triumphs in career erotic.
Another could her heart engage,
are used amongst us by the lower classes only."
As a poetic life serene,
a portion of their heads shaved as a distinctive mark.
A promenade in twilight late
As for her spouse he loved her dearly,
a similar contrivance in our own old-fashioned tea-urns which
As in a garden when I grew,
As in a thicket's humble shade,
A substitute for lamps we hail!
And the young girl appeared before
And the young ladies fortunes told,
And the young revellers of past times
And though her soul might be confused,
And thou, youth's early inspiration,
And thus ancestral dust reveres.
And they the waters recommend.
And though I read it with distress,
And thus each stubbornly proceeds.
And thus it is 'twould cause me pain
And thus secures the prey we seek.
And thou shalt taste the joys of earth.
And thus unto her nurse did say:
And truffles, dear to youthful eyes,
Anew the flames of passion start
And thy inebriating wave
And town and friends forgotten quite.
And traces with a slender finger
And where the billows hoarsely raise
And who the rent-roll of his race
And tiresome rogues ridiculous
And when for Olga nurse arrayed
And wild among them grew her words—
And two old pines their branches spread—
And when her violence reviewed—
And wild festivities among
And would by candlelight arise.
An exile from their troublous reign,
An infant maiden doth exhort
Another could her woe assuage
a noted "dandy" and man about town. The poet on one occasion
A noted fop who gambled hard.
A notoriety proclaimed,
A pensive sorrow in her glance
Appeared, Don's effervescing boast,59
Applause, the people's donative.
Approach not to hearken
Approach not to gaze at
are provided with a receptacle for a red-hot iron cylinder in
Aroused in him some tenderness.
As formerly the shepherd sits
As in the timid forest deer,
A slave of actresses capricious,
Assemble from the neighbourhood:
Assemblies oligarchical
As we lure the young gallant,
At a great feast against desire,
At each extreme one takes his stand,
Athwart the snow four paces came—
Avenge himself in proper style.
A vision desolate and drear
A while ago the winter spent,
Baptized Prascovia Pauline,
Barking, young ladies' osculations,
been expunged either by the author himself or the censors. I have
Before the altar, lo! the pair,
Behold her downcast eyes which glow,
Behind, of glasses an array,
Beneath her parents' eyes the maid
Beneath the sheltering oak tree's shade
Between the blanc-mange and the roast;
Bows and the scrape of many feet,
Bringing his partner corpulent
Britzka, kibitka, or in coach.
At eventide would hither come,
At last the author!" cries Mamma.
At prisoner's base she never played.
Attentive to the echoing sound,
At the same hour she oped her eyes
Because my lord, in battles maimed,
Beneath the flag of Quietude,
Beneath the moon which dimly shines,
Burger, b. 1748, d. 1794.
Both aunts looked knowing as a judge,
But, as he never opened them,
Bouyànoff too, my cousin, wore58
But by degrees the crowd begin
Beside the cup she sang her rhymes
But dinner-time comes. Two and two
But somehow there shone in his look
But ever the Hussar."
But suddenly all changed around!
But I abandoned their array,
But Tania ne'er displayed a passion
But now—none heeds the monument
But when the winter season came
Came with Monsieur Triquet, a prig,
Capers applauds with clap of hands,
Doth on the billiard table rest,
Do ye of spring the blossoms graze?
But that Princess Pauline of old,
But, when Oneguine's turn came round,
By absence who hath chilled his love,
Congratulations, toasts resound,
Contemplativeness, her delight,
Desire to rule ye may observe
Didelot, sometime Director of the ballet at the Opera at
By "belle Tattiana" to replace.
Ceased for a space all chattering.
character in the "Dangerous Neighbour," a poem by Vassili
Dies suddenly: of heirs alone
Distracted by her grief appears
Do ye not hear my mournful sighs?
Dreading the world's remarks malign,
Dressed him, undressed, and dressed again?
Dressing as quickly as he can,
E'en from her cradle's earliest dream,
Each gust of temper, silly word,
Eight rubbers were already played,
Eight times the heroes of the fight
Employ your glasses constantly,
Eloquent raver all-surpassing,—
Enamoured at her feet to fall.
"Elvina, my dear, come, give me thine hand," and so forth.
Enough, enough, conclude thy lay—
Entranced me by some mystic tale.
Eugene, more tolerant than this
Exceptionless as no rule is,
Ere crimson stains their hands defile,
Eugene would speak regarding these.
Exclaiming, "We must change 'em all!
Eugene directs the trusty man
Eugene in hackney carriage placed.
Existence without wife or friends,
Faithfully shall I now depict,
Feeling in others much esteemed.
Feeling is silly, dangerous.
Flies past the porter to the stair,
Fond declarations they invite
For consecrate to me he fell
For dolls, e'en from her earliest years,
For evermore had disappeared.
Foeman or friend, I do aspire
Foes! Is it long since friendship rent
Forgot the world, the noisy ball,
For evermore is separate.
For o'er a word to fashion known,
For folly's dues thou hadst to pay.
Forgive the fever youth inspires,
For otherwise—God only knows!
For our amusement ever made
For patience, reader, I must plead!
For promises her feet reveal
For savage speech, uncouth and strange,
For the first time the hammer clicks.
Forth from the crowd of nymphs surrounding
Fragments of northern poetry,
For tallow, wood and other things
For was it not her duty to
For which our praise he hath deserved.
Free scope he yields unto his glance,
But contrary to her advice
But finally grew bored by her.
"But lo! forth from the valleys dun
But now—what brings you to my feet?—
But now in her effulgence pale
But strength of mind and self-restraint
But soon she altered all her ways,
But that the eyes of every one
But this is my advice, 'twere best
But wherefore not?—'Tis pleasant, nice,
But who in that choice company
But with her elder sister I
But would not look at Cicero.
By a rich pie were occupied—
By bee and butterfly which pass.
by contemporary Russians. But a century back a very infinitesimal
By flattery and lover's art—
By Heaven in lieu of happiness.
CANTO THE EIGHTH
Canto the Eighth
Cast down his eyes in trepidation
center. The tea-pot is usually placed on the top of the
Constant affection intertwined
conventionality, is not unfrequently subjected.
Corneille's majestic genius,
Deeming himself a veteran scarred
"Die now, Denis!" In fact, his subsequent performances were
End of Canto The Seventh
Enough! my pack is now unslung—
era.
Deliberate approach of guests
dramatist. His first comedy "The Brigadier," procured him the
Drank to her health in the first place,
Enclosing pictures of fair dames.
Even beneath her parents' roof
Each gave Tattiana's arm a nudge
Endowing us from out her store
endowment of literary ability was sufficient to secure imperial
Ere this but one brief moment beat
Eugene of course related nought,
Euphonious, though I know a spice
Fair object of my guileless lay,
'Fare thee well, and if for ever,
favour of the second Catherine. His best, however, is the
Faithless, alas! thy maid appears,
Fat Poustiakoff drove to the door;
filled up the void with lines from a fragment left by the author
First reconciled and then content;
By recklessness amuse or shame
By waters shining tranquilly,
Caricatures he now designed
Certainly not Eugene alone
Childe Harold, quaker, devotee,
Doth in us or our names appear26
Dreamed in the future man and wife.
Entrusted all to her sincerely,
Corset and album and Pauline,
Crush and confusion in the hall,
"Enough to see one winter's end;
Even amusing fools we miss
Even so! His passions soon abated,
Doth his brow wretchedness declare
Doth seem to him the festal scene.
Exist—that their immortal band
Farewell! thou golden days of love!
Each other as the shore we climb!
Et cetera; but nothing showed
Existence calmly sped along,
Farther Tattiana's walks extend—
For ever with thy tattling lyre,
For my wild garden and bookcase,—
For visions of my childish years
Found out the secret how at pleasure
Four deadly paces do they span;
French tragedy.
Felled a calumniator base!
Finally tost his arms in air
Flanked by immortal Strasbourg pies,
For ever carps, condemns, pursues?
For long—for ever. To be sure
For long he had endured them all.
For Moscow fops and Circes each
For there he left a mournful trace.
For treachery had done its worst;
Free, in the blossom of his spring,
Friendship and friends he likewise curst,
Friends of the sons of every land,
From boxes or from stalls in rows.
From careless stanzas such as these,
From Gottingen inspired he came,
From habit or maliciously,
From the moist cork the bottle freed
And unto whom we all allude
And vehemently though amazed
And viewed the door with cunning eye.
And Virtue acts as a narcotic,
And vows will probably be signed:
And watch her eye's full glance to meet.
And we—an unattractive set—
And what from its recess appears?
And what like menaces fatigues,
And what resulted? Drunk with love,
And what she from the cards inferred.
And where tempestuous love's desires,
And when I prayer to Heaven addressed
And where a madrigal occurs
And where at last his bones repose
And where may be her sister now?
And wheresoe'er thy footsteps err,
And where the admirable streams
And who is not a tiresome thief?
And wholly occupied his day—
And wisely gallops to the hill.
And wildly waves its arms and storms;
And with remorseful anguish filled,
And with gray hair ambrosial
And yet he in your cause would strive
Another tribune of the ball
An oval countenance and pink,
appearance created some excitement in Russian society. A more
appropriate, or at any rate explanatory title, would have been
are also much in vogue during the Carnival.
And yet oblivion forbade.
And you, O maids immaculate,
an inducement in the southern and fertile provinces of Russia
Announcing to him dinner-time.
And yet the city's flower was there,
An ear to my confession lend;
An honourable course ye took,
An idle anchorite and sad,
Another! to none other I
Another with cock's head appeared,
Another bard with art divine
Another passed; 'twas just the same.
A novel in Lafontaine's style,
Anticipating woe she pined,
A paragon of virtue he!
Are all your relatives quite well?
A passionate desire to bend
A print without the picture's grace,
Appear attuned to softer chords;
A register of fleeting thought,
Around the garden homeward hies.
A Russian poem's mechanism
As drunken tramps at nightfall sleep,
A Russian household simple quite,
As butterflies to blossoms cling.
A schoolmaster in yellow shawl
As every journal now entreats,
As formerly much agitation.
A shape half cat and half a crane.
As if he cruelly had joked!
As if it were some funeral feast.
A something somehow have obtained,
A sportsman who in covert lies.
As rosy lips without a smile,
As Saadi anciently averred—86
Assistance ever will extend,
Are not with elegance impressed.
Are turned upon her. All combine
A ring she heard the ancient strain:
A rivulet beneath them shoots
Around her neck, now violently
Around the meadow and the grove.
A sidelong look doth Eugene dart:
Aroused in him sweet reverie.
As many entertainments be!
assault and ensuing massacre.
As the sins of my youthful days
As Winter in their purity,
A tangled wilderness around.
A table to the fire is brought,
At forty suffered from the gout,
At his pale brow a shot to have,
A timid love to banishment?—
"At Làrina's."—"Hem, that is queer!
At least by show of sympathy;
At least their accents and their words
At morn an icy bath within
A trouble fell upon the sprites;
At Russ she was by no means clever
A true Childe Harold my Eugene
At seven in summer rose from bed,
At table she was sitting by
Arouses rustics from their sleep.
Arouse yourselves, fair ones.
Arrange without the least delay—
as his predecessor in song, though he certainly did not plead
a short brilliant poem in praise of conviviality. Pushkin
Aside she casts her veil of gauze
As if against obstruction sore
A simple tombstone hath been set.
A single being: 'twas in fine
As in their turn the seasons roll.
As in her heart the thought sank home,
A smile from slumbering nature clear
As once, to fill the rapid page
As one who bivouacs afield,
As partner of my mournful days,
At Làrina's abode produced
At last my father gave his blessing,
At morn I must assuredly
A true account and in detail.
attained with the 9th grade, hereditary with the 4th.
Attentive to the heart's first beating,
at the Lyceum. We regret to add that, having accepted a
At this time almost understood.
Aunts, mothers and their scrutiny,
A spirit which for sorrow yearned.
As storms which in chill autumn rage
As to a worthy man and good!
A stream, by winter's ice unbound,
As vernal storms the fields athwart.
As when the tempest's veil is drawn
Ate Russian pancakes at Shrovetide,
A tender couplet he combined,
At fifty who relief obtained
At first, I clung to secrecy:
At last is shrunk and withered quite?
At last became a ruined man.
At morn, hand clasped in hand, they rove
A tombstone, Aphrodite's shrine,
Attentive listened to his speech,
At thirty who was married well,
At times, if only once a week,
At times my reason almost bends,
At times three words to him addressed
Attractive in its banefulness?
At twenty who was prig or swell,
Aurora's ruddy rays of light—
authors of Pushkin's day and rummage biographical dictionaries
Authors replete with sacred fire
Autocrat of the drawing-room seek?
A Vampire fond of meditation,
Awakens secret merriment
Aye bids ye in some way or other—
Beats that of friends and relatives:
A worthy object 'tis, and well
Become a faithful wife and e'en
Become alarmed. So never mind!
Before whose inexperienced sight
Beneath his lips' devouring kiss.
Besides the hobbies of a spouse
Both day and night he now must pass
Before him red roast beef is seen
Behold Sabouroff, whom the age
Beneath her downy pillow placed,
Better than Chateaubriand did
Born of a babbler in a loft
Buried in meditation deep,
But at a later, sterile age,
But boldly I myself resign:
But cannot stand the northern cold.2
But enough! Now, 'tis my intent
A very troublesome disease,
A visionary mortified,
Avowal then 'twas time to pray,
Await the long-delayed caress.
awakes to hear the tinkling of her lover's sledge approaching.
Away her golden earrings tore;
A weary season was at hand—
Awhile sound conversation seems
Awhile this beauty captivated,
A whisper runs along the hall,
A windmill too a jig performs
A young man motionless he saw,
b. 1753, d. 1814. Introduced to the aged Voltaire during
A wish from place to place to roam,
 Baratynski Feasts
Barking, songs, whistling, laughter coarse,
Baratynski, see Note 43.
Barely to draw her breath she seems,
Bear gone—she at the threshold placed;
became Vice-President of the Academy of Arts at St. Petersburg.
Because her passion wanted art,
Because in singleness of thought
Because I should be sure, meanwhile,
Because she was so innocent,
Before her straight with roguish eyes.
Before him her wild game of chance.
Before whom once in solitude,
Before you agonized to die—
Behold, my sobs I scarce restrain—"
Behold! orthography despising,
Behold, the crowd begins to stir,
Behold the dames who once were fine
Believe me, of my present shame
Beneath his head the pillow smooth,
Beside the thundering abyss
Beyond the city-barriers haste.
Beyond this may attempt to write.
Blank, unapproachable and cold.
bottle."
Brought by a pedlar vagabond
But Eugene was by fate preserved,
But finally in wedlock bind.
But finally she softly said:
But from the interview what flowed?
But gazes on Oneguine's face
But gray Phillippevna the door
But how? Quite so. Though I dismiss
But I await thee: scarce alive
But if my lot unfortunate
But, knowing not the actual truth,
But Lenski madrigals ne'er wrote
But lo! already the moon's light
Bard of the "Feasts," and mournful breast,43
Bard of the Finnish maiden young.49
Believed, the people's wisdom weird,
Beneath the eyes of ladies bright
Beside a nameless rivulet,
Bevies of treacherous maidens young;
Both bush and brake, ravine and steep,
Both natural and truthful seemed.
Bruin is marching at her back!
But cannot anyhow evade
But competition I abjure
But he desired not to beguile
But I came not to adulate:
But I perceive thou dost not heed—"
But I the products of my Muse,
But I was sharp in times gone by.
But lonely beneath Finnish skies
But Olga would not such peruse.
But pause! Thou calm retreats, farewell,
But look you—ah! do not refuse."
But say he was a genius who
But Lord! from friends deliver me!
But send your grandson before long."
But lo! the friends to chat commence.
But merely to exasperate;
But my Oneguine the whole eve
But not at present, though sincerely
But nought for this Tattiana cares.
But no reply unto her made.
But now my mind is desolate,
But now—my very blood congeals,
But praised be God! in health art thou!
But round the hostess scintillate
But now our minds are mystified
But now ridiculous a bit.
But, O ye tomes without compare,
But sad is the reflection made,
But promise of our meeting gave,
Calling to mind your icy look
Epicurean philosophers,
Canto the First
celebrated comedy "Woe from Wit" Gore ot Ouma.
Eighteen December 1788 by a Russian army under Prince Potemkin.
God knows! The very trace is lost.
Before the dregs they shall divine
Behind her a grave general.
Behold! than polished floor more nice
Behold! the moon was shining bright
"Boredom, my friend, behold the ill—"
being waged between two hostile schools of Russian men of
Beside our youthful heroine fair,
Brambles she snaps and lilacs crushes,
Betimes, and sees, when morning breaks,
Bright blazed the window of the place,
"Bring dinner now without delay!"
Billiards abandoned, cue forgot,
But borne in spirit far away
But Adam Smith to read appeared,
But could not. Then she questioned him:—
But deeming all this nonsense pure,
But finally she heaves a sigh,
But, I acknowledge, from them fled;
But I must now employ my Muse
But I—what is all this to me?
But home his body to despatch
But, howsoe'er his lot were cast,
but made his peace with Napoleon and was appointed Archbishop
But sweeter still it is to arrange
But turn we once more to our dame.
But if the truth I must relate,
But Lenski, I should be so glad
But little warmth the fireplace lends,
But scarce had turned the corner nigh,
But stop! I will present thee, if
But this adventure's consequence
But this amusement delicate
But wide Tattiana oped her eyes
But with austerity!—for you
But ye, O happy husbands, ye
By Providence's dark decree!
CANTO THE THIRD
But ye to whom, when friendship heard,
By daily life deteriorated,
By barren snow heaped up and bound,
By Faublas in his youth was schooled,5
By Olga's hand distributed
Could not eclipse her neighbour's light.
Calm and without embarrassment,
Canto The Third
Can we not stealthily make out
d. 1797, famous for his bold oration denouncing Robespierre,
"Delighted."—"When?"—"This very night.
Domestic life attracts me still,
Do we alone our losses mourn
Do we foresee in troubled dreams
Can scarce in sweetness be a match.
cultivated the vernacular as opposed to the Arzamass or
education.
'Elle etait fille, elle etait amoureuse'—Malfilatre
Enchanting, but unwittingly,
For him an honourable grave,
Frequent and rapid doth his glance
From mere vacuity of mind
Familiar to him long ago.
For God's sake, Lenski, don't begin!
For which no springtime shall appear?
From you too Eugene took to flight,
Gallic school, to which the poet himself and his uncle Vassili
End of Canto the Second.
Fair source of every fine idea,
Furious he from the table rose;
Espying, Eugene with a smile
Feather-beds, also poultry-coops,
"Good-bye, Oneguine, I must go."—
Examined, mended, newly found
Hath mixed himself in the affair,
heavy obroks have at times been levied on serfs possessed of
He drinks, all drink and loudly call;
He feared the criminal might try
Hangs heavy on the oaken boughs,
Harvests of souls unceasingly
Having abjured the haunts of men,
He felt the laudable desire
He knits his brows—'tis silent all.
He might his motives have narrated,
Her friend Monsieur Finemouche the same,
He ought to have conciliated
Her cap of tulle still ever wears:
He reads at random, reads in vain.
Here an old witch with hirsute beard,
Her eyes no saucy glance address,
Her features no grimaces bleared;
Her manners were deliberate,
Her on a shaky bench sit down;
But shall depict the touching scene
But sits in bed with air depressed,
But staggers, slips, and falls. We greet
But stay! A dolt am I who speak!
But she, her sister never heeding,
But still remembrance to him clings,
"But strange am I to happiness;
But such is not for me. I brood
But sudden fear assailed Tattiana,
But suddenly a snowdrift stirs,
But ten strikes and his sledge he mounts
But the date subsequently changed
But the young unpolluted heart
"But tell me, nurse, can you relate
But the indifferent princess,
But to the garden once again
But trembling on the mirror dark
But tremor still her frame possessed,
But thou, Bordeaux, art like the friend
But thoughts meander far away—
But what a nuisance it will be,
But what results? His eyes peruse
But to Oneguine! A propos!
But trusted the ideal she wrought?—
"But which, my dear?—In days of yore
But upon all that Eugene knew
But who abandon it—as I
But why are your cheeks whitening?"
But when Tattiana's hand had ta'en
But wretched who anticipates,
By an avowal just as plain.
But what astonished do I find
But wilful, frivolous, and light.
But with confused and bashful air,
But word for word his letter read.
By children and by faithful wife
By dull insensibility,
By every proper-minded wife,
By fond illusions once possest
By friendship how they were abused,
By his embarrassed dignity—
By indolence and languor fired
By liberties or loose or light.
By melancholy fogs concealed.
By night prepared for sorcery,
By the fine silver of the north.
By whom the youthful bard was slain?"—
CANTO THE FIRST
by means of a "svakha," or matchmaker. In Russia unmarried
By neighbouring families bewept,
censors, and consequently expunged.
"Come," she cried, "sister, tell me e'en
Come sing we in chorus
Dark shadows thicken—a dread cry
Demetrius Larine, sinful man,
departments, civil or otherwise, personal nobility is only
departments of the State, civil, military, naval, court,
Diminishes as years decline.
Discovered much absurdity,
Distinctly not its mechanism.
doubt and cynicism in his youthful mind, allegorically as the
"Drive on!" the cheerful cry goes forth,
Drive on! the city barriers hoary
Drunk as a fly; and thus the French
English dramatists had also their share in influencing his mind,
E'en as the poet says he leant.18
Encountered punishment complete,
END OF CANTO THE FIRST
Enjoyeth peaceful slumber here.
Ennui can in the country dwell
Ere conversation could begin,
essentially imitative type. As an example of his Shakespearian
Eugene at first began to dream,
etc., abound in Moscow and elsewhere.
Extinguished ashes do not blaze—
fast that his sword, projecting from the vehicle, rattled
Ever receive with kindly hearts
Examine her from head to foot.
Extended—haunt which Dryads love.
Fashion is there immutable,
fermented rye used by the peasantry, and the more expensive
festal occasions in the country the whole party is usually
Eugene designed with me to start
Ever absorbed a maid so much:
Except one by the window placed
Extinct the flame which once had fired;
favourite country residence of Mikhailovskoe, in the province of
For a protracted space of time.
For ever faithful will abide."
For, from the outset, 'twas unjust
For a fictitious misanthrope,
For every loyal Russian breast!
For law I far niente take
For Lenski, sought him with her eyes,
But, that life longer may remain,
By rank as settled by the State.27
By visions who was ne'er deranged
"Christmas Carols" is not an exact equivalent for the Russian
Displayed a noble rectitude—
END OF CANTO THE FIFTH
Eternally to imitate
For ever your Tattiana leave.
For journalistic deglutition
Customs by ages sanctified,
Enjoy the meed which Fame bestows—
Discourse of Bentham or of Say,
For our Automedons are fire
For rural solitude and dreams,
for the purpose of ransoming him; but Peter would not surrender his
For the impatient chief instead.
For two whole days it seemed a change
founded.
Free, I renewed the idolatry
From apprehension of the cost,
From gales a hill behind was seen;
From hence engrossed in thought profound
From her my lips shall learn the tongue
From public and from private ties,
From shades of the relentless past.
From such digressions wholly free.
from the city, is unique and splendid. It possesses several domes
from the fact of two gilt crowns being held over the heads
From storms protection having sought,
Full many a lovely star hath night
Gazed on him, called him. Useless care!
From whose analysis minute
Funeral amateurs abound!
Gazing into his face, she said:
Gifts such as these alone could prize,
Girls in anticipation skip!
From the dread pistol turn away.
Full many a glance like lightning flash,
Glides with a more luxurious ease;
Glittered in a perspective long,
Goddess of lovers' tender sighs.
God grant that all who herein glance,
God save his soul eternally
Grasped a long knife and instantly
habitues of contemporary St. Petersburg society. Viazemski of
Go hear the rustling of the oaks
Had bid her sigh for without hope—
Grateful to Heaven for their lot.
Gvozdine, a landlord excellent,
Had let fall many a bitter tear:
Had much to do at home that day,
Gallop, mazurka, waltzing—see!
Gliding in negligent career,
Gravely repeating to another
Grew brighter still. But Lenski hath
Habit was given us in distress
Glory with which our history teems
godson who died at the age of ninety-two, having attained the rank
Guillot behind a pollard stood;
Gvozdine, Bouyànoff, Petòushkoff
Had come both friends and enemies—
Had not yet withered his young breast.
Had reconciled the pair anew!
He eyed her with a fond concern,
Good governs all! The hour draws nigh
Go, on the Neva's bank appear,
Grant that I err not on the road."
grasp me in the region of the heart, and I fell insensible."
Great sacrifices for his sake!
Habit alleviates the grief
Hateful the hollow world became,
He deemed his friends but longed to make
He has returned, say in what guise?
Greek names, e.g. Agathon, Philotas, Theodora, Thekla, etc.,
Grew like a lily pure and white,
Heard he the truth? And thus she could—
Heart would not throb albeit in jest—
He deemed of human life the goal
He kindled his poetic flame.
He racked his brains to find its clue
He finally lost all delight
He mused: "I will her saviour be!
Her amorous experience
Her antiquated mode of speech,
Her hand for the cotillon prays.
Her money counted, and designed
Her sacred hoard of joy and tears,
Her toilette's antiquated style,
He was a dear delightful fool—
Handbook of fashionable phrase
Handsome and rich, the neighbourhood
Happy he who in youth was young,
Happy who thereto can unite
Happy who timely grew mature,
Harmless, but quite nonsensical.
Harnessed the rapid sledge arrived:
Hark! the mazurka. In times past,
Haste, haste thy lagging pace, my story!
Hath suffered but indifferent grown,
Hath whiled the road's monotony,
Have entered never to return.
Have one by one all withered grown
Hath the bard, by indifference blest,
Having a trusty staff bestowed,
Having once fixed your interest,
He could in disputation shine
He drops his pistol silently.
He loved the simpleton to mock,
He oft upon his lips would curb,
He on his bosom gently placed
He on the conflagration frowned.74
Hath gradually learnt to endure;
Hath she a fitting phrase selected?
Hath she found out the riddle yet?
Hath tranquilly in turn attained,
He deemed his coming would inspire
Her caps and night-dresses to mend.
Her cheek of rosy loveliness
Her locks were of a golden hue,
Her Martin Zadeka in aid,
Her nurse, who could have made a guess,
Her foot was in my other hand.
Her Grandison was in the Guard,
Her movements, voice and figure slight,
Her sentimental verses all,
Her the ideal which he dreamed,
Her tresses curled in fashion saw,
Her utterances ever heard,
He sang of life's fresh colours stained
He sang of love—to love a slave.
He sang of separation grim,
Have latterly vexatious grown;
Having for money's sake alone
Having remarked Vladimir's flight,
Heavy his heart with anguish grew;
He left you first, and I must own
Her husband was a bridegroom then,
having reference to this canto.
Having this mournful document
Her Moscow cousin, often told
Her spacious fields and shady groves,
He always replied "da" or "nyet," yes or no, instead of "das"
He bending whispered in her ear
Her steppe-like beauties I peruse
He shunned those parties boisterous;
He brought from mystic Germany
He found him on the table laid,
He from his Kalmuck horse did leap
He hies unto the "Boulevard,"
He smiles, in laughter all combine;
He there is master—that is plain;
He thought to write, but labour long
He took the room wherein the old
He to the festival repairs,
He was deceived. Just as before
Hid in the gondola's dark shade,
Hills, a low range bordering the river Moskva at a short distance
Him who inspired both love and awe,
Himself just like a greenhorn fell.
him to be baptized at Vilnius. Subsequently one of Hannibal's
His care unto his pistols' plight,
His breast was riddled through and through,
His daughter's book to ascertain
His ditties were as pure and bright
His comedies, a noisy rout,
His energy and impotence.
His harp beneath that sky had rung
His heart reciprocated still
Hearing the fatal perfidy?
He bends his course to Talon's, where8
He bowed to her nor silence broke,
Heaved an involuntary sigh
He enters: in the hall a crowd,
He enters: rapidly discussion
He enters: to the mill he drives:
He called upon me Christmas Eve—
He cannot give me happiness."
He cared no longer there to stay,
He enters. Ah! good news to-day!
He enters. High the cork arose
He found them in an almanac,
He gazed upon the clock which showed
He had excepted from the ban:
He is not there: I am not known:
He knew not how to spend his life.
He knows Kaverine will repair.9
Her agitation and distress
Here, drunk with his late victory,
Here I remark all poets are
He long should have been on the road.
He nears a spacious mansion's gate,
He now a full possession takes,
Her all in all did constitute;
Here bottles stand in close array,
"Here, he resides with Simeon.
Herein my portrait should detect,
Her eyes were of cerulean blue,
Her sisterhood delights the young
Her with a smile old women greet,
He was in error; for Eugene
He was no fool, and Eugene mine,
He was no more! The youthful bard
He who life's frosts which early wrung
He usually was glad to see
He wrote 'tis the romantic style,
Highways all Russia will unite
himself have called it. Indeed, since Byron, poets of his school
His fate shall presently decide.
His housekeeper was wont to scold,
his imagination. His great-grandfather, Abraham Petròvitch Hannibal,
His immorality of mind
His malady, whose cause I ween
His mournful heart no peace could find,
His own antagonists expert,
His recent glory he invokes.
His ruffian bravery adored,
His shop, a night-cap on his head,
His song, when still he slumbered deep,
Her feet the earth beneath her press!
Her girlish gaiety and sport.
Her glance how wild yet genial!
Her garden, and those books of hers,
Her heart: it seemed a darksome pit
He rings in haste; in haste arrives
Her path across the plain doth keep—
Her promptings unto law did make,
Her shoulders, breast and face to lave—
Her heart how full of gentleness,
Her heart importunately turns.
Her heart more loudly and more fleet.
Her lips where light smiles come and go!
Her shoulder—Olga swiftly came—
He's a straightforward little chap."
He took no more the slightest heed;
He was a dangerous fool indeed.
He who hath suffered ofttimes shrinks
'He rushes at life and exhausts the passions.'
Her wolf-dog and her husband tame;
He was an honest gentleman,
He who economy abhorred,
He writes upon his parents' tomb,
Her inmost soul had penetrated,
He's a freemason, so we think.
He who hath lived and living, thinks,
He with an innocence extreme
He with his little maiden played,
He witnessed tenderly and moved
He would not that a man ye slay
He yawns, averts his countenance,
hierarchy. There are fourteen grades in the Tchin assigning
himself must have been in the habit of approaching Moscow from his
Him a disquietude did seize,
His book-shelf instantly doth drape
His butting horns in anger bent,
His chair, plate, knife and fork in haste;
His character attracted me.
His fist Oneguine fiercely shook
His Frenchman, good Monsieur Guillot,
His head sinks slowly, rests upon
His inner consciousness laid bare,
His neighbour's lowly tomb and mourned
Hissed forth. With serious air indeed,
however returned to the Kremlin on the 19th September. The Palace
His travels like all other things
His valet brings him letters three.
However, the mazurka lacks
His constant soul could ever tire,
His entrance with Oneguine. "Ah!
His friendship I acquired just then;
His furs are powdered on the way
His hand, and fell. His clouded eye
His hate by slander, and who spends
His momentary loving glance
His son is married, just conceive!"
His soul by crash of music fired,
His visit she had not awaited,
his youth appears to have entertained great respect and
His uncle, busy man indeed,
His weary head declined at rest,
Honour and pride inflexible.
His tea with rum no more desired,
His transports were quite maidenly,
His wadded coat and cap with peak
His watch, the sun in turn he views—
His wife was also mad upon
Hopes, frolics, dreams and sentiment
Horror! had she not better stay
How bitterly he would malign,
How! from the waste of steppes unseen,"—
How like the billow I desired
Howl like a dolt: 'tis meant for me!
How mean, how pusillanimous!
How much is in that word expressed!
By other thoughts be occupied.
By the old lime-tree or the rill,
By poor Tattiana in the blues;
By time who can anticipate?
Byron's capricious phantasy
By sympathy I have been driven.
by various expedients, is the favourite pastime on these
Calmly her eyes encounter his—
Can lower depths beyond remain?
CANTO THE FOURTH
Canto The Fourth
By such allusions scandalous,
By the coarse wit of worldly hate;
Carried a truth divine away;
By the decree of Mighty Jove,
By Tolstoy's pencil marvellous,
Cast upwards then her eyeballs dim
catastrophe turns out a dream brought on by "sorcery," during the
Caught him and by the collar took
Can she have been a moment gone
CANTO THE FIFTH
Canto The Fifth
CANTO THE SEVENTH
Careless of fame his spirit high
Ceaselessly to the maiden sweet
Cease the pursuit of shadows vain,
Charming is your sincerity,
Certain misfortune near opined.
chiefly known for his erotic poetry which attracted the
Chained to his bedside night and day
Ch. Nodier. "The Vampire," a tale published in 1819, was
Clarissa, Julia, Delphine,—32
Comfort and succour to the poor,
Command him not to say a word—
"Command me, darling, what you choose"—
Commence a new career in life
commences thus: "The cat asked the kitten to sleep on the stove."
Companion of my childhood's days.
contemporaries. The editor once excused himself for some
Demands that I translate for you
comparison.
Condemn not weak Tattiana mine;
Confessions which a trusting heart
Confess, O ye who this peruse,
consigned to oblivion, will impress the reader with the
devoted themselves to the cultivation of the vernacular.
Did not their lips with foreign speech
Conquer by passion and address,
considerable influence over certain of its leaders, notably
Descends the bank with care extreme,
Detecting him the passing horse
Did seem to greet the youthful year;
Deserted Eugene. He, distraught,
Did they not all the Russian tongue
Do agitate his late repose.
Down in the courtyard magpies gay,
Draw near. I soon to sleep shall go—
Drive out the cattle from their shed,
Driving abreast three horses gray.
Eaten, drunk, gossiped and grown stout:
Economy political,
Endless conjectures all propound
End of Canto The Fourth
Engrave the ice with strident noise.
Consisting of harmonious lays,
Could in a humble sphere despise,
content with a single development of Burger's ghastly production
Could not in that brief moment guess!
Could in romantic mantle drape
Cropped in the latest style his hair,
Daily of love in solitude.
Deep in the distant province rude,
Delighted glances in return;
Deprive our schoolgirls of repose,
Depicted on your haughty face!
Despair and anger seize on me,
Cursing his own stupidity,
Danced the mazurka gracefully,
Dark, unavailing reverie,
Delicious visions, jests and fights!
Desirous to annihilate
des Membranes," "Anatomie generale appliquee à la Physiologie et à
Divinity without access
Do all things which to mirth incline.
Doctors and women, sobs and groans.
do so. These branches were adorned with little painted pictures
Develops and matures its powers,
Dreaming herself the heroine
Dressed like a London dandy he
Enamoured, simple-minded, poor,
Enhances love in estimation
Enchanted by the moon's pale beam.
"Enough, arise! for much we need
errand. It is a repulsive subject. "Svetlana," however, is more
Eugene fell prostrate at her feet—
Eugene, his pistol yet in hand
Even as the love of children dear.
Farthingales, patches, were the thing,
Eventually petrify
Excruciate the heart and late
exhalations during his researches.
Faces which we meet everywhere
For baseness of the spirit scorns,
For him were but of little worth,
Follow up love—a secret meeting
for the dates of their births and deaths. Yet the poet's prime
Forth the kibitka gallops swift,48
Fresh aspirations I have known,
For the young poet they display.
Friends, I must your indulgence pray.
Friends of Liudmila and Ruslan,1
From happy inspiration flow,
Dmitrieff
Do me a favour and appear.
Do not cold-bloodedly repeat
Doth in her gentle eye appear.
Doth love's incautiousness in her
Dreaming perchance in weal or woe
E'en as the presence of a snake,
Either with him or thee in song,
END OF CANTO THE SIXTH
Entreaties, woes and prayers, confess
Epistle second, note the third,
every male added to its number, though this could have formed
Ever by adverse fate oppressed,
Exhausted by my woes and rhymes,
False confidence or doubt to impart,
Flew to collect his rural tax;
For Ay is like a mistress fair,
Fly frequent to my solitude,
For I myself was thirteen quite;35
For on their brows I trembling read
From Romulus unto our day.
from the basin whilst the remainder sing in chorus the "podbliudni
Frosty the night; the heavens shone;
E'en hopeless egoism's dark shape.
fashionable society. It should be borne in mind that at the time
For which the poet agonized
French was the language of the Russian court and of Russian
From everything the heart held dear
Fruit of the yearnings of the heart.
Full many a foolish prank brought forth;
garment not known, so far as I am aware, to Western Europe.
eminent English poets have been laid under contribution by him,
Enough! with tranquil spirit I
Ere the bright messenger had set.
erroneously attributed to Lord Byron. "Salathiel; the Eternal
Existence would not make a curse,
fame mainly rests. Joukóvski was an unblushing plagiarist. Many
Far from his Italy—his own.4
E sempre bene, gentlemen!
Fearing his pupil to annoy,
For empty sound the rascal swore he
For shame lift up the modest maid.
For summer to the country flown,
Fortune the poet had repaid.
For twice you came to them and yet
For whom, Tattiana, is it meant?
Full of exasperating thought.
Gazing on Lenski's corse did stand—
Gazing upon a note below.
Gently for pranks he would reprove
Girls the kashourka much prefer.52
girls wear their hair in a single long plait or tail, "kossa;"
Give me just half a glass of wine—
Glimmers and dies. This is well known,
"Goddam! Goddam! par un French—Dog." It is descriptive
God grant I meet not at a ball
Good-night." Behold! she is alone!
graceful phraseology, and a strong pervading sense of humour.
gown.
Griboyedoff Woe from Wit
gross error by pleading that he had been "on the loose."
Grow harsh and cruel, dead and dry,
Grown clammy, stick fast in the snow;
guilty to the fact, since he remarks in his ode to Ovid:
Had filled her youthful breast with gloom,
Had finished life amid his sons,
"Had he been long here, and where from?
Had killed me had the like been told."
Had perished a creative mind,
Can hearty welcome give alone.
Canto The Seventh
Careless of every social rule,
Catherine the Second downwards. It is characterized by a feverish
Confront thy fated torturer!
Conscious of death approximate,
Dally with a dishevelled tress
Despite the anguish of his breast,
Either she saw not or ignored;
Enraptured was he if allowed
Eve and Twelfth Night. Divination, or the telling of fortunes
Fantastic images shall swarm
For first "madame" his wants observed,
Deep into debt his father ran;
Descended swift in turbid streams
For riot, frolics, mighty feeds,
Fresh cause of quarrel then I'll find,
Gay flowers and luscious fruit doth yield.
Had rendered him an invalid;
Had run across her path at speed,
Hallo, Andriushka, onward race!
Happy and glorious. But this brings
Happy who quit life's banquet seat
Had to compose in secret rhymes,
Hard by the window took her place."—
has been carried off by a kaldoon, or magician.
has now to search for the very names of most of the popular
Hath pictured in his gorgeous line
Haughty appear, subservient,
Have echoed to eternity.
Have felt love's agitated kiss
Have e'er a precious tress consigned,
Have guessed already. Yes, quite so!
Have my Oneguine—suddenly.
Have shone as one of fashion's leaders.
Having lost all in life we prize.
Having performed his service truly,
He a polite reply doth scrawl.
Hears not my importunity!
He back as from a sudden blow?—
He daily in his drives drew near
He conversation would have led—
He dragged her by a forest road
He enters the saloon. 'Tis blank!
Heedless of your despairing cry?
He fixedly upon her stares—
He hath acquired the world's esteem
He in imagination saw
He is a charming youth and wise.
He laughs, although it aches from cold,
He lies, upon his forehead death,
He marmot-like did hibernate,
He ne'er shall hear Time's eulogy,
He obstinately will remain,
He offers her his murderous paw;
He perished. Where his troubled dreams,
He quits the fashionable throng
Her bosom heaves whilst crimson hues
Her bow was easy, unreserved.
Her brow she did not e'en contract
Her cheek reclines upon her hand.
Herds low, and under night's dark veil
He read as vainly as before,
Her passion's faithful counterpart,
Her tears and her dishevelled hair;
He will delight you, I am sure,
He wrote and spoke, so all allowed,
Himself transformed into a hack;
His course unto the running brook.
His daily occupations, lo!
His Hellespont from bank to bank,
He read the unbelieving Bayle,
Her eye with fire unwonted gleams.
Her figure perfect grows with time!
Her handkerchief she loses now;
Her house he enters, ghastly white,
He roars, and "Ah!" Tattiana cries.
He round the billiard-table stalked,
Herself not knowing well the reason,
Her tears flow plentifully and
Her shaggy myrmidon in chase.
He salutary rules poured forth?
He used to hate—and was no fool—
He thought so, and existence charmed.
He wanders in his indolence;
He was most gay. The happy date
He went not—sooner was prepared
His gusts should fertilize, amend,
He whom we sing to shall be made
His elegies, which plenteous streamed,
his last visit to Paris, the patriarch laid his hands upon
His bit with foam besprinkled o'er,
His cup unto his maiden dear.
his literary reputation by inditing an "epic" poem entitled
His son and mortgages his lands.
Her suit before my parents pressing:
He sat, and then the livelong day,
He seemed for matrimony born.
He was beloved: or say at least,
He wakes—they with a letter come—
His double sashes and his grate,
His footing on the treacherous rime
His lyre, to silence now consigned,
His name: the tenderness of home
His pony sniffing the fresh snows
His vanity first let us pique
Homer, Theocritus, he jeered,
Hope to conceal and jealousy,
Horror of sinfulness and shame,
"How came you then to wed a man?"—
His kneeling posture he retains—
His mother from the door doth scold.
Hopeless are all the first, I own,
his own grave, from which he has recently issued to execute his
His relative and friend as well.
His sunken eye and aspect faint,
Hope with her fascinating power
"How are our neighbours fair, pray tell,
His wife approaches, with him leads
How artless was the note which spoke
How bright and tender was his look,
How charming Olga's shoulders grow!
How dark the night is getting though!
How deftly could he transport feign!
How full of fire his speech would glow!
How empires store of wealth unfold,
How in the country pass this time?
How meekly then I heard you preach—
"How now, Oneguine, yawning still?"—
How flourish, why and wherefore less
How I have erred and felt the rod!
How oft beneath the moonbeams pale
"How often in thine arms I lay;
How oft the kindly Muse away
How oft to the Crimean shore
How oft, when on a summer night
How perfect doth our epoch grow!
How pleasantly the evening jogs
How sick to death his uncle lay
How soon he learnt deception's art,
How soon he learnt to titillate
I
How soon to habits she conformed
How sweet a dream your memories raise!
"How Tania grows! Doth it appear
How the young imp on Tania doted!
How thoroughly her part she took!
How thy hands burn!"—"Dear nurse, I'm well.
How well he played the greenhorn's part
How with thy medal I would play,
Hung like a print against the wall,
Hung on a pine branch earthward drawn
Hymen's embarrassments, distress,
I
I
"I am in love, nurse! leave me now."
Hurrah! it long ago was time!
I
I also wandered there of old,
I am in love, my hour hath come!
I am—in love—you know—don't tell!"
I Apuleius gladly read
Huts, chemists, Cossacks, shopkeepers
I
I
I
"I am in love," her whispers tell
I ask, all ye who poets are,
I blame not your behaviour—
I by the button-hole seize fast
I am acquainted with fresh care,
I cannot help it I declare,
I cannot longer wage concealed.
I cannot tell on what pretence—
I cannot tell the reason why,
Delusions of a mind untried,
Deplores a most unworthy spouse
Device of rural minds acute!
Disperse yourselves, darlings,
Disport yourselves, maidens,
Doubt and uncertainty decide:
Dreaming of what not, pretty lass,
Dreams with no continuity,
Espy him approaching,
Even the rosy wafer dries
Far from the rest the pair would creep
Esteemed him much as the world goes.
Even as Moscow, city proud.
Forgive me! Such the love I bear
Forgotten in the village lone,
For your instruction here to tell
For maiden's hearing deemed unfit,
Found them in darkness side by side,
Friends and companions,
From hall to yard and garden flies,
Destroyed the blossom of his prime.
Do not excuse yourself. I read
"Do not—you might—suspicious be;
E'en for an instant find delight,
End of Canto the Third
Entreaties, oaths, fictitious fear,
Epistles of six sheets or near,
Eugene was touched with sympathy;
Ever to hear the same replies
Feelings which long had ceased to be
Everywhere trumpeting its feats,
For us, may be for many a year.
For who imposture can endure,
Found the ideal of my youth,
From henceforth I confide to thee!
From her half-open vest of night.
Guards fondly hope's uncertain dream.
Habit would bring indifference.
Hath fate apportioned unto thee
Have smuggled his flagitious lay.
He somewhat blushing would omit:
He well-nigh lost the use of sense,
His arm he offers. Mute and sad
He "Benedetta" used to hum,
Her head upon her breast declines
Her health, life's sweetness and its bloom,
"He's here! Eugene is here!
His ardent soul with full delight.
His eyes, the printed lines betwixt,
I cannot understand. But lo!
His friends and also enemies
His spirit was intent upon.
Homeward returning, he at home
I
I am not strong enough to state;
I, after so much eloquence,
I am not worthy them in aught;
"I call to witness God on high—"
I can't translate the adjective.83
"Ideal," he had drowsy grown.
"Ideas and time ne'er backward move;
Ideas, desires and woes confuse
Idolatry of liberty,
If but to lighten Time's dull rate,
From first to last page to the rim.
Grows pale and sinks, but nothing says;
He called to mind Tattiana's grace,
He still made love in a queer way;
He takes his seat, concludes his game,
Hewn, hacked, and otherwise ill-used.
Had a deluded victim been
"He hath neglected us of late."—
He heard his soul's complaint within,
He in the early years of life
His intellect in close array.
Her smile and maidenly repose,
His chambers close wherein confined
His spirit sank with strange delight.
However, Tania's letter reading,
How like a poet was my chum
He leisurely adorns for her.
"He promised here this day to ride,"
Her in the pitfalls which we place.
Her weary eyes are filled with tears—
However cherries might abound,
I can't conceive a little dear
"I celebrate a comrade young
"How dull you are this morning, nurse!"
idea of the intellectual movement in Russia from the Empress
I did not please you. Why pursue
I envied sore the billows tall,
If cleverly or not I prate.
I feel, allotted is my span;
I feel thou wast by God sent down
If he had only known the wound
If his hot hand encountered hers,
If in the scenes of home I might
I flushed up, stupefied I grew,
If not, the money I will lend."
If Olga smilingly approve,
I formerly admired her much
If seriously he hath disease;
If the choice in my power were,
"If the domestic hearth could bless—
If the fond hope I could have fanned
If the poor maiden could have guessed
If the raw product they possess
If they but heard domestic loads
If they were similar in aught.
If thou wert sitting by my side,
If wife and children to possess
If ye but knew how dreadful 'tis
I heard thy voice's resonance
I hear your harsh, reproachful cry.
II
I guard it as a holy thing,
II
II
II
II
I had found my predestinate,
I have dreamed many a vision fair
I have endured without respite.
I have it. Lo! the very thing!
I have known beauties cold and raw
I have no leisure here to dwell,
II
II
II
III
III
I long by ballets have been bored,
Imploring looks and mute complaint
In bullets, sabres, and in fight.
incident recalls the "Mon cher Tibulle" of Voltaire and the
in constant use amongst Russian females.
In column blue the smoke doth rise;
In cruel solitude each day
Indifferent he became to all,
Inflict annoyance and distress
In monsters and fair dames was rich;
In pages of a love narration
III
III
III
III
III
III
I just hint, in parenthesis,
I know not if his heart felt pain
I know that Parny's tender pen42
I know there's none more amiable.
I lift a warning voice because
I like the difference to express
I like this word exceedingly
Illusions, dream, where, where your sweetness?
I long enough deceived have erred.
I long have ceased to offend the laws.
I loved you—what did I obtain?
I love its furious delight,
I love you with a brother's love,
imaginary demon in the person of a certain friend of Pushkin's.
imagination of Pushkin is well known. Shakespeare and other
I'm beaten in another matter;
I'll pass beneath the firmament,
I'll sprinkle thee with holy water.—
I love them, O my dear Elvine,14
I love you—to what end deceive?—
I married—now, I supplicate—
I mean my name not to repeat."
"I'm happy, say, is it not so?"—
Immersed in secret thought I stand
Impatient, boiling o'er with wrath,
important work, written 1817-20. It is a tale relating the adventures
Impressionable for an hour,
I must resign myself, in sooth;
In a half-open dressing-gown
In a lax or informal way,
In amorous flights when so inspired,
Imagination's sacred fires,
Immersed in melancholy thought,
I'm o'er it ever pondering.
Impatiently the gallery stamps,
Impelled to union with his own
Impressed him in the least degree,—
Impatient waits the close of day,
In age the memory gets worse,
In books he saw nought to condemn
Incited by his stormy Muse
In clouds of steam above perceive.
In boston and the game of age,
In bud of promise incomplete,
In coach or post-cart duly placed
In country solitude you mope,
Indifferent was her future fate.
Indites an inconsiderate scroll
In dreams and what the moon foretold
In course of time the whole extent
In dressing-gown, a cuckold glad:
In dressing-gown at meals appeared.
inducement lay in the fact that the "tiaglo" see previous
In duel having killed his friend
In fact, some people were assured
Infallibly you there will find
I never should have seen your face
In fact, the subject analysed,
in Finland.
Inhabited the country, clad
In love's campaigns Oneguine heard
In love-lorn meditation sad.
In melancholy loveliness,
In mist profound all yet is hid.
In mother Winter's strange caprice.
In her affairs ne'er interfered,
In her friends' albums, time had been,
In little maidens of thirteen?
In motley and amusing chase.
In much his conduct stigmatized;
Inns there are none. Pretentious but
In Olga's album, youthful maid,
In one he doth accounts behold,
In groups, official striplings glance
In hopes of everlasting fame
In many things had changed his life—
In mud and mire to wallow deep,
In order due the maidens pull;
In Russia however its origin is as ancient at least as the
In scarlet sash and sheepskin trim;
Insensible her hand remains
In scenes like these it may be though,
Inseparable from our lot;
Inseparable they remained.
Inseparable soon they be.
In some a willing martyrdom.
In spectacles and chestnut wig.
Imagine! Here alone am I!
I might to connoisseurs repeat
I'm not for witchcraft now inclined.
I mourn, but tears I cannot shed—
Impelled by Spring's dissolving beams,
Imperial portraits hang around
I murmur not! Why mournfulness?
Impelled by zeal for moral worth,
Incessantly his chains to break."
I mused: perhaps the matter's squared—
In company, or simply bowed,
In correspondence been allowed.39
Incorrigible rogue, doth go.
Indeed, by force of magnetism
 Indifferent and sedate,
In my young days of wild delight
In Olga's and Tattiana's rooms
In one great shout: she's mine! she's mine!
In poor Moldavia cast her lot,
In rhyming I show laziness.
Impetuously clove its way
Imprudent prattle of the heart,
in Athens," "Fingal," "Demetrius Donskoi," and "Polyxena," are
incarceration had such an effect upon his mind that he committed
In charming fashion mutilate?
In consultation stand aside—
"Inform me, prince, pray dost thou know
In horror for itself alone,
Inheritor of all his race.
In love adventures she was versed,
In scarlet cap revolving glides.
In serious mood or dalliance
In aimless ease and far from strife,
In country towns, where still it keeps
In Olga's face no life's displayed.
Inside clink glasses, cries resound
In snow she sinks up to the knee;
In solitude or worldly din,
Inspired but weariness intense;
Inspired by whom this tenderness,
Inspired him with disgust and so
In spite of common sense we're wont
In spring-time, heard the cygnet's note
In such an album with delight
In Tania's praise in pouch he brought,
In the beginning of this lay,
In springtime on the meadows green,
Instructed jestingly the boy,
Interrogation to denote.
In the broad meadow a gay rout,
In the dawn of existence drear.
In thee, thou world of empty bliss.
In the first place, say, am I right?
in the fields with their infant husbands in their arms. The
In the French language perfectly,
inferior Russian newspaper of the day, much scoffed at by
In former years thus did not I
In fresh discourse. Such, love, thou art!
In haunts of fashion where each day
In history he took no pleasure,
In idleness and tranquil joy
In jersey and in nightcap lay.
in lieu of the forced labour or in consideration of being
In old age life is weariness!"
In the lone garden and the lane?
In tranquil flow. The beetle hums.
In one of thine enchanting lays
In one thing really did excel.
In that morass where you and I
In the meantime her spirit sinks,
In this case quite mistaken was.
In the meantime the mill inspects.
In time I'll give ye without fail
In the recesses what hath stirred
Into accounts would sometimes look,
Introduce verse in conversation.
Into the chamber where he slept
Into the cups already sped
Is it not truth? in tones suppressed
is therein praised as the best of companions "beside the
It occupied him from a boy,
Into the lonely house she went,
Into the starry night extend.
In vain my anxious eyes appeal;
In vehicles surcharged with freight;
It whiled his idle hours away
I visit in these days, with melancholy mind,
I would, my friends, inscriptions write,
In life domestic see a string
In love, although its tempests vex,
In sensual sweets his soul doth steep
In silence shall I sit and yawn
In their sterility of prattle,
In the Lyceum's noiseless shade
In Russ her love made manifest,
In solid, unpretentious style,
In the beginning, cold and mute,
In the world's mortal revelries,
In this the love of the fair sex
In the unfettered hours of leisure
In the unmoved, magnificent
In the world's vortex my success,
In three weeks would arrive for them;
In times gone by thy bare command—"
Into delicious bondage gave
In thy imagination warm,
into prison and though shortly afterwards released, his
In vain was youth by us received,
In whispers low the neighbours said:
IV
I write to you! Is more required?
IX
Jackdaws on every spire—in scores.75
Lessons to give he understood!
Listless is she the livelong day
Intoned it, manuscript in hand.
Into the district then to boot
into the head-gear.
In truth he had the happy trick
Into the study of the boy
Into the tangled garden goes
I yield with a low reverence;
L
Into thy hands my fate I yield!
In true interpretation hates:
Is occupied with Olga fair,
Laid down his life of sun and storm
Landscapes thereon he would design,
Lenski at intervals would dare,
Lo! at thy feet my tears I pour
Lofty the chambers one and all,
Long ago. Dream it cannot be!
Look through the window and kill flies.
loose character by Jean Baptiste Louvet de Couvray, b. 1760,
lyric poet of some originality and talent. The "Feasts" is
Man—forty years long in this wise—
Marat and Danton.
Metreless verses recognizing
Mine own ideal, the mountain maid,
My heart's allegiance can resign,
My doom has been pronounced on high,
My guardian angel to the grave.
My heroine, Tattiana dear.
My venerated reader, oh!
My verses, kindly meant, would earn
Nay! even as this instant fled,
Modest yet daring! And a tear
Nonsense and pure absurdity,
Nor died nor lost his senses quite.
Note 45: Count Tolstoy, a celebrated artist who subsequently
Nor discontinued to distress
Nor frigid adulation paid.
Nor interest in aught betrays.
Note 43: Evgeny Baratynski, a contemporary of Pushkin and a
Note 4: Referring to Tomi, the reputed place of exile of Ovid.
Note 5: Les Aventures du Chevalier de Faublas, a romance of a
Obsequious or indifferent!
of assimilation.
Of drawing-rooms or old or new.
Of love again, and yet again;
of Napoleon and of France. He was likewise a poet and author of a
Of Olga he in song averred;
Of one thing till again we met.
Of tender years the modesty
Oft upon friendly lips doth rise:
Or kiss the border of her dress.
Or, with a pen and colours fit,
Ovidii Nasonis Tristium, lib. ii. 207.
Oneguine ne'er as poet showed
Our liberty at least survives:
Ovid thus enumerates the causes which brought about his banishment:
Shaking with serious air the head,
Silk tapestry upon the wall,
"Perdiderint quum me duo crimina, carmen et error,
Qu'ecrirer-vouz sur ces tablettes?
Scarce hadst thou entered thee I knew,
Singing God knows what maid admired,
Sombre or glad in turn to be,
Some are afar and some are dead.
Sometimes by pleasing flattery's art,
Some army poet therein may
Some nice instructive novel read,
Sometimes by ready-made despair;
Spring cheered him up, and he resigned
Strummed by a timid schoolgirl o'er.
Subscribed, toujours à vous, Annette;
Surely ye all have overhauled
Sweet slumber winged its way and fled.
Oh! where bestow our love? Whom trust?
Oh! who is not calumnious?
Oneguine oped the cupboards wide.
One morn whilst yet in bed he lay,
On lines invisible are fixt;
On the steppes of Moldavia lone,
Or, as it were, the Freischutz' score
Or by a card our homage pay,
Or torturer malevolent?
Presents her quarto amiably,
Proud of his dinners and his wife!
Providence otherwise may deem—
Pushkin, then residing in Bessarabia, was in the same predicament
Satan will jest, and at love's cost.
Should be respected throughout life
Spare yourself unavailing pain
Tattiana more than ever burned
Tattiana's letter I possess,
That glimmered through the radiant night
Tattiana's Letter to Oneguine
The above catalogue by its heterogeneous composition gives a fair
That until Christmas comes again
The amatory science warm,
That afterwards with evil smile
The country whereunto a mournful age thee sent.
The crafty spouse caressed him, who
The fashionable rhymester's heart!
Invigorate imagination
In what he merely acquiesced.
In winter by its blank and dim
In winter on the fender bright,
In winter time would often come.
In winter, when Night longer holds
In worldly din or solitude
In yarns of youthful troopers gay,
In your young days and also mine,
I once forgot for your sweet cause
I on my chosen hero dote;
I owe the censorship a little.
I promised!—Did I so?—Well, there!
I prefer sensible Bordeaux.
I sail upon my lake at times
is a species of thick pelisse worn over the "sarafan," or
I say without poetic phrase,
Is cocked once more. Uneasy grown,
is "Doushenka," "The Darling," a composition somewhat in
I see you weep. Those tears of yours
Is ever ready to proclaim
Is ever ready with relief,
Is ever thus. With frowning brow
"Is he known to you?"—"Yes and No."
"Is he the same or grown more wise?
I should alarm our friendship tried:
Is no more cherished amongst men.
Is sweeter than thy Helen foul.
Is it a dream, and can it be?
Is it that ardent souls of flame
Is it that human restlessness
I still a complication view,
It may be that I did proceed—
It may be ye were born, or there
I tried when I began this tale,
Is the world to him sealed and dumb?
Istomina* the nimbly-bounding;
It is called by the natives "doushegreika," that is to say,
Its driver seated on the rim
Its ebullition foaming white
itself is placed in the midst of extensive grounds just outside
Is full of frigid jealousy,
"I shall expire," Tattiana cried,
Is it for long?"—"Ma chère cousine!"
Is it not true? the objects fair,
Is it that I am now compelled
I slumber much, a little read,
Is once again made manifest.
I speak not of our poems here,
Is petted by the Emperor?—
is responsible to Government, may be paid. The abuse of early
Is seen next pine-apples of gold.
"Is she in love?" quoth one. "With whom?
Is still condemned in love to be;
Is this the same Tattiana, say,
Is waning. Yonder valley deep
It blew: it howled: till winter e'en
It carries of antiquity
It gradually possessed his mind;
I thank thee for thy joyfulness,
I then resolved my heart to tear;
I the same admonition make.
I thought—retirement, liberty,
I thank thee. In thy company,
It matters not. Hope e'en to these
It may be, I yield nutriment!
It may be that his martyred shade
It now to investigate is time,
I tremble lest my humble prayer
Its cold unfeeling sentences;
Its insignificance I know
Its name, my friends, was Martin Zadeka,
Its passions and its modes of thought.
Its splendour and its blandishments,
Its stamping, capers and high leaps.
Its waters to the neighbouring vale.
It was a cheery, generous
I uttered to my lady fair
IV
IV
IV
It wakens in my breast again.
It will be by a mob beset
IV
IV
IV
IV
Ivan Petròvitch still a gaby,
I've had to make for having friends!
I've thought well o'er the general plan,
I've scanned it with a jealous eye,
I've wasted in amusements vain,
I was half silly with affright.
I was for calm existence made,
I would desire my bride to be—
Knew not an iamb from a choree,
Lo! my Oneguine free as air,
Marie Francois Xavier Bichat, b. 1771, d. 1802, a French anatomist
I write, and anguish flies away,
IX
IX
Jilted—glad of a holiday.
I yield the fruit of work severe.
Jacob Borissovitch Kniajnine 1742-91, a clever adapter of
Judge then what roses would be ours,
Just at the hour we designate
Just so! that modest swain is blest
Katènine translated Corneille's tragedies into Russian.
Keep your accounts! You'd rather not?
Kept lingering on as loath to go,
L
Lenski unto the dame replied,
Lest jaded with satiety,
la Medecine," and "Recherches Physiologiques sur la Vie et la
Lest the malicious reader or
letters. These consisted of the Arzamass, or French school, to
'La Morale est dans la nature des choses.'—Necker
Latin is just now not in vogue,
Learn Russian, but the Lord defend!
Learn to possess more self-control.
Let me present ye to the man,
LI
LII
LIII
Like Byron, bard of scorn and pride,
Like other things I could relate
LIV
Love to idealize inclined;
Love to inspire doth woe appear
Mankind," in 4 vols.
May be, and this my terror wakes,
Like Hippocrene it scatters light,
Listen to me without disdain.
Looms gray behind the mist and morn
May be the empire of the sense,
Meantime I'll finish whilst I can
Meadows and cornfields are displayed,
Mikhailovskoe, 1825
Minutely I will now portray.
Love, flowers, the country, idleness
Make up your mind to go there."—"Ah!
May well in innocence impart.
More crimson every moment they.
Meantime in matutinal dress
Must take a walk and rest a bit—
My beauty, thou art ready too.
Most by this circumstance offended
My country's honour and repute
Mechanically, let us add,
Merciful God, what will he deem?"
"Me?"—"Yes! It is Tattiana's fête
Me your perfections would not bless;
Moina recalls for this alone
"Minor" Niedorosl. Prince Potemkin, after witnessing it,
Monsieur clean out of doors they chase.
"Monsieur l'Abbe" a starving Gaul,
Mirabeau and Sieyès. He is said to have originated the title of
Morality taught scarce at all;
Misunderstanding, words and blows.
More swift the room Tattiana fled,
Mort." He died at an early age from constant exposure to noxious
Must visit them. Come! you must own,
Mute, solemn, frowning gloomily.
Most usually a Cossack horse
mutilated Dante's famous line.
"My darling, growing old am I!
My friend, 'tis but to pay a debt,
My goddesses, where are your shades?
My heart of old would captivate.
My heart with but one look revive;
My lyre sings sweeter in the shade
My morning birdie, yesternight
My neighbour, who by chance drew near,
My scholar without aptitude
My soul I cannot renovate—
My sum of happiness contained;
"My uncle's goodness is extreme,
of Goethe and held the poet of court chaplain at Weimar. His chief
My very latest composition!
My wretched Lenski's fate I mourn,
Nearer they come—Eugene appears!
Next Saturday. The Làrina
No answer all that day was borne.
No greater pleasure can exist
No more at dawn the shepherd will
None, be my witness Heaven above!
No one my anguish comprehends,
No other book had time to read.
Nor at the hour of noon with sound
Nor did her blushes fade away,
Nor doth my absent pen portray
Nor in his dreams anticipates
novelist and dramatist of the Revolution, who contrary to his
Obeyed the impulses of heart?—
Of censure for the same incurred;
"Not in the least, assured am I!"—
Of every sort and every set!"—
Of fleeting glory take no heed.
Oh, many a year hath run its course
Oh! who her speechless agonies
Oneguine knew enough, the rogue
Or "Idol mio," and in the grate
Or even, silent and resigned,
Or into bold hands anxiously
Or quietly partake our woe.
Outside descend the mists of night.
O ye whom tender love hath pained
Ozeroff, one of the best-known Russian dramatists of the
Pallid and with dishevelled hair,
Nor marked how summer's prime had fled
Nor on the letter yet hath she
Not all will like myself proceed—
Not daring to cast back her eyes.
Note 10: Denis Von Wisine 1741-92, a favourite Russian
Note 1: Ruslan and Liudmila, the title of Pushkin's first
Note 22: Refers to two of the most interesting productions of
Note 24: The neighbours complained of Oneguine's want of courtesy.
Note 23: The barshtchina was the corvee, or forced labour
Note 2: Written in Bessarabia.
Note 38: A Russian annotator complains that the poet has
Note 3: In Russia foreign tutors and governesses are commonly
Note 40: The "Blago-Namièrenni," or "Well-Wisher," was an
Note 42: Parny—a French poet of the era of the first Napoleon,
Note 44: The samovar, i.e. "self-boiler," is merely an
Note 6: A la "Bolivar," from the founder of Bolivian independence.
Note 7: M. Breguet, a celebrated Parisian watchmaker—hence a
not of equal merit.
Odes Lenski also had outpoured,
November at the gate did stand.
O'er all a sheet of silvery dust
of 1861 by the serfs to their lord.
Of clamorous geese flew southward bound.
Of horn in circle call them round.
Of keen sarcastic intellect
Of late I have been quite absurd,—
Note 39: It is well known that until the reign of the late Tsar
Note 41: Hippolyte Bogdanovitch—b. 1743, d. 1803—though
Note 46: Yazykoff, a poet contemporary with Pushkin. He was
Note 47: The Abbe de Pradt: b. 1759, d. 1837. A political
Note 8: Talon, a famous St. Petersburg restaurateur.
Note 9: Paul Petròvitch Kaverine, a friend for whom Pushkin in
Of error and the passions' strife.
Of harmony enshrining thought.
Of kindly, dim antiquity,
Of maids dost thou inscribe thy song?
Note: Mikhailovskoe, 1825-6
Note: Odessa, December 1823.
Note: Stanza left unfinished by the author.
Not seeking love but sensual sweets.
Now don't be cross with me, my soul,
Of a young dark-eyed country maid,
Of friends the grateful intercourse—
Of thankless friends the circle rose,
of the approaching conquest of Britain by Napoleon, and
Of the commencement of the piece.
of the knight-errant Ruslan in search of his fair lady Liudmila, who
'Oh, do not dream these fearful dreams,
"Oh! nurse, nurse, you don't understand!
"Nothing, good nurse, there's nothing wrong,
Now I am ready to refuse.
of Malines.
Of pictures painful harrowing,
Oh! what had been his eminence!
O my Svetlana.'—Joukóvski
Oneguine, O my gentle readers,
Oneguine's letter!"—"Ah! the thing!
Oneguine then approached and said:
Oneguine was a citizen
Of many an economic scheme;
Of my impassioned heroine.
Of the sun glisten; muddy, worn,
of three days per week rendered previous to the emancipation
Of widow Clicquot or Moet
Oneguine acted very well
Of the Æneid, but incorrect.
Of the cup brimming o'er with wine—
Of the domains of the side-scene.
of the Gazette de France. He wrote histories of the Revolution,
Oneguine was—so many deemed
Oneguine whither gallops? Ye
On fresh allurements they are bent,
On innocent delights I dote,
On the dull stage find all things changed,
On winters of the south a skit,
Of touching lightly every theme.
"Oh! what a fool our neighbour is!
Olga's admirer came that day:
One and the same thing it may be
On horseback gallop o'er the steppe!
On the blue blocks of ice the rays
Opened with care, and entering bore
Or, after dinner's dull repast,
Or a professor in tulle cap.
Or at a promenade mayhap,
Or Bogdanovitch's sweet lays.41
Or else I deal not here in jokes,
Or for the solitary tomb
Or letters of a maiden young.
or "nyets"—the final s being a contraction of "sudar" or
Or, parable more flattering,
Or to disturb my dreams approach
"O Rus!"—Horace
Or will my melancholy glance
Our fathers used to dote upon;
Our union would produce but grief.
Pale as a ghost and dressed since morn
Pallid and melancholy face,
pamphleteer of the French Revolution: was at first an emigre,
Pedantic although scholar like,
pension from Napoleon, Parny forthwith proceeded to damage
Perchance he will to all the three.
Perchance one more affectionate.
permitted to exercise a trade or profession elsewhere. Very
Perchance they laurels also cull—
Perchance upon the Neva e'en
Perchance you also soon may burn,
period; he possessed more originality than Kniajnine. "Œdipus
Possessed nor ease nor fluency,
Poetic transport. They impart
Poltroons and men of slanderous tongue,
possessing considerable poetical talent was like many other
Prince Viazemski
Prophecies, threats and apparitions,
Permit me; is it worth the trouble
philosopher, philanthropist and author, was the personal friend
Pierre Francois Tissot, b. 1768, d. 1864, a French writer of the
Pursues phantasmagoria vain.
Quite inadvertently meanwhile;
Raises within my breast as oft
Readers expect the rhyme of rose,
real wishes became entangled in its meshes. He exercised a
Rebuffed—as quickly reassured,
Regained authority awhile,
Repentance wields not now her spell
Replace the visions fancy drew;
Retained the image, though short-lived,
Revolution and Empire. In 1812 he was appointed by Napoleon editor
Rings, tears, deceptions and intrigues,
Rural Life
Russian authors more remarkable for successful imitation
Salguir is a river of the Crimea.
Saturday Review of the 2d August 1879.
Scarlet as burnt by inward flame.
Sebastien Roch Nicholas Chamfort, b. 1741, d. 1794, was a French
She fears and like an arrow rushes
Serious endeavours to assure
She heard of servant-maids the note,
Scarce mindful of their love and guile.
Seductive, animated, bright,
She sank.—
She waits, on fire her trembling frame—
Shrill sang the samovar at eve,44
Singing inside her hut the maid
skill or accomplishments, or who had amassed wealth; and
Snorts, and his rider bends his course
So many neighbours here exist—
Sometime collected, shall relate
Spins, whilst the friend of wintry night,
Still thirst fresh draughts of wine compels
styled "monsieur" or "madame."
Such open-hearted innocence.
Russia's Terpsichore review
Shone pungent Satire's dauntless king,
Simeonova, a celebrated tragic actress, who retired from
Singing in chorus all the while.
Slowly exhausted by desire,
samovar.
Sarcastic Shakhovskoi brought out
Since I beheld Eugene and young
Spared him not their asperities.
Such am I. This did ye expect,
Shall I your chorus hear anew,
Speech careless, incorrect, but soft,
Such was Oneguine's sainted life,
Such were the musings of Eugene.
suicide.
Tattiana doth accept his aid;
Tattiana in a misty dream,
Tattiana moans and now she sighs
Shamefaced, Tattiana downward looked
She did not think "procrastination
She from the winter corn espies
She is an angel! We sometime
She never of deception dreamed
Silent, oracular ye'd see him
Some wretched journal in his hand;
Striking the intellect with awe
Silvers the brook; the shepherd's horn
Similar dames ye may have seen.
Tattiana blushed, her heart beat quick—
"Tell me, why doth your comrade stay?"
She sits alone—'tis ever she!
Since Fame and Freedom he adored,
So mouths they stopt with song, not fruit—
Sound sleep, books, walking, were his bliss,
Tend not my heart to mitigate,
So she in French herself expressed.
Tattiana waits. No answer came!
than for original genius. His most remarkable production
That all may hear his voice's tone.
That is, he could elucidate
That year the autumn season late
The all-entrancing joys of love—
The artful prisoner should seek
The balls impelled, the blunt cue chalked;
the best known of his tragedies.
The boy was wild but full of grace.
The break of day she doth not see,
The bridge and alley to the lake,
slang term for a watch.
So frequently his mind would stray
Some day I'll somehow finish it.
So irremissible appear?
successful conclusion and become matter of history. A good
St. Petersburg.
summoned the author, and greeted him with the exclamation,
Take to their wings and fly away.
Tania doth by the casement linger
Tattiana, dim with tears her eyes,
Tattiana faltered, and became
Tattiana, saucy Olga thine?"—
Tattiana's love was quite sincere,
Tattiana with impatience waited
That Heaven her character had blent
the celebrated tract from the pen of the latter. "What is the
The china teapot too ye might
The choicest flowers of French cuisine,
The country hath its liberties
The credulous indeed are blest,
The curse of commonplace delight.
The deuce take friends, my friends, amends
The disenchanted glass direct
The drama of my youth was played.10
The dusty chronicles of earth
The easier 'tis to gain her grace,
Thee only, pledge of all things bright,
Thee only would I choose, in truth,
The Fête
The fair, nor parted with regret,
The fair of the next generation,
"The family are all quite well—
The fire sinks low. An ashy cloak
The fragrant tea in darkling stream,
The frolics of maidens.
The goblet still is bubbling bright—
The God of Love is after you!
The golden ember now enshrines,
The hero is of my narration!
The father scarcely understands
The feeble moment would espy
The first-fruits of my tale I read,
The first bright wreathing storm of snow
The flowerbeds skirts, the brook doth meet,
The forests in mysterious gloom
The giddy world at last shall see.
The heart of the inveterate flirt!
The hostess doth interrogate:
I was incensed and he was sad.
"I weep. And if within your breast
I will descant on love's sweet dream,
I will not wed, and ever weeps
I will with thy divinity
"I with my friend intend to fight!"
"I won't detain you; but 'tis hard
I would not part with finally;
I would your vigilance arouse,
IX
IX
IX
IX
IX
I yield for splendid vanities,
Jaws are at work. On every side
Jealousy and vexation took
Jew," a romance by Geo. Croly.
Johann Gottfried von Herder, b. 1744, d. 1803, a German
Just at a moment which I grieve
Just at that time his father died,
Just before dinner-time he slept,
Kept the accounts, shaved many a crown,*
Know that your sarcasm ill-suppressed,
Kvass is of various sorts: there is the common kvass of
Kvass needful was to them as air;
Lapped in your Eastern luxury,
larger villages, which alone could support such an individual,
labouring classes.
Late in the afternoon to rise,
kvass of the restaurants, iced and flavoured with various fruits.
Lenski his pencil-case took out
"Leonora," which has found so many English translators. Not
Longer the East inert reclines
"Lovage," the Levisticum officinalis, is a hardy plant growing
Like his, her dress was always nice,
Like Venus when, capriciously,
Likewise an epitaph with tears
Long ago, prostrate at her feet.
Love's pangs Tattiana agonize.
Madame Krudener. The frequent mention in the course of this
Madman, wilt thou from memory raze
maiden loses her lover in the wars; she murmurs at Providence
maiden to elope. Instead of riding to a church or bridal chamber
Malek Adel and De Linar,31
matin dans sa chambre, je le trouvais brossant ses ongles avec
matins à brosser ses ongles peut bien passer quelques instants à
May be that I by heaven's decrees
May find a crumb to satisfy.
May yet be studious of his nails;
Meantime, drink deeply of the flow
meaning of the passage is therefore: his earthly marriage
Meantime Oneguine's apparition
Me now, inflict upon me pain?—
My country and an exile's lot;
moi, qui n'en croyait rien, je commençai de le croire, non
More satisfaction to her taste.
More troublesome than usual?"—"No!
My famous portrait indicate
My friends, what means this odd digression?
My gratitude do not disdain,
Morning awakes with joyous sound;
Morning's forerunners, breezes blow
Mushrooms for winter salted down,
My light productions to retain,
My tongue is somewhat rusty now.
My unpretending page shall fill,
"No misery I see in that"—
No other than Oneguine mine.
My joy in youth was fleeting e'en
My mournful fate in verse to weave,
My spirit with such pangs before.
My little book. With thee I knew
Night separated from her spouse,
My soul is filled with gratitude!
Nights, which extend from Christmas to Twelfth Night, for
No more the music thunders loud,
No, never in the early blaze
"Not at all."—"That I can't conceive!
Note 29: The fortress of Otchakoff was taken by storm on the
Not that she had his works perused,
Now we must separate. Good-bye!
Nor further comment that night made.
Nor shall my pen paint terribly
Not a bad fellow was her father
Note 11: In Russia large fires are lighted in winter time in front
Note 12: "Tout le monde sut qu'il Grimm mettait du blanc; et
Note 13: Refers to Dictionary of the Academy, compiled during the
Note 33: "Melmoth," a romance by Maturin, and "Jean Sbogar," by
Note 14: Elvine, or Elvina, was not improbably the owner of the
Note 31: The heroes of two romances much in vogue in Pushkin's
Note: Odessa and Mikhailovskoe, 1824.
Note: The serfs destined for military service used to have
No trace ye left in passing by
Now with what eager interest
Of Christmas carols, song and dance;
Of friends unceremonious would
Of slumbering citizens he fleets,
Of passion reminiscences,
Of passion they so often raise.
Of splendid carpets richly wrought.
Of the horizon she is like!"—
No novelty—is it not true?—
Note 15: i.e. the milkmaid from the Okhta villages, a suburb of St.
Note 27: The foregoing stanza requires explanation. Russian
Of fiery youth's untutored days
Of frivolous existence, friends;
Of happy meetings thou shalt dream,
Of the romances she preferred,
of the theatres for the benefit of the menials, who, considering
Of untold gain she must conceal,
Of whirligigs were very fond,
Oh! on the fields of life how bloom
Old people's simple conversations
Olga the tea must supervise—
On guests their servants used to wait
On balls I madly used to dote,
On Trinity Sunday yawned at prayer,
Or bosom full of languid fire,—
orders during the Carnival. At other times it is difficult
Or faults of grammar on its page—
Oneguine, hast forgotten yet
"Oneguine, I was younger then,
On raptures, sorrows not her own,
Or by the ocean's rocky shore.
On this artistical retreat
Or couplets more ingenious still;
Or in a squabble to engage,
Or Melmoth, gloomy wanderer he,
Or that adoring Grandison
Note 28: A play upon the word "venetz," crown, which also
Note 30: "Svetlana," a short poem by Joukóvski, upon which his
Of Russian domesticity;
Note 32: Referring to Richardson's "Clarissa Harlowe," "La
Nouvelle Heloise," and Madame de Stael's "Delphine."
often without going through the form of acknowledging the
Now Didelot scarce can be endured!"
of the bride and bridegroom during the ceremony. The literal
Opened the portals of the tomb
Or the delivery of a note.
Our heroes at full gallop sped,
Or the mysterious Sbogar.33
Our tender dreamer had enrolled
own title, and also written a poem "Liudmila" in imitation of it.
pancakes or "blinni" are consumed vigorously by the lower
Perchance some heart 'twill agitate,
Perish absorbed by Lethe's stream.
Philosopher just turned eighteen.
Phials of crystal scents enclose.
poem of romances once enjoying a European celebrity but now
Pictures of the amusing scene,
"Poor Yorick," mournfully he said,
Our hero stops and doth alight,
Pardon I ask for such a sin—
Past darkened windows and long streets
Petersburg on the right bank of the Neva chiefly inhabited by the
phrase. "Podbliudni pessni," are literally "dish songs," or
Pray is it not a tough affair
popularity amongst his countrymen is a fact familiar to all.
Preserves and an eternal prattle
proceeds to vocal music.
Portray the solitary den
Present me."—"You are joking."—"No."—
Profiles of lovely dames he knows
Providence at length loses patience and sends her lover's spirit,
pronounced entirely original, though its intrinsic beauty is
purposes of divination. Reference will again be made to this
Quite a sensation; the position
Reader, whoever thou mayst be,
Rekindled in my withered heart
reign of Catherine II under the supervision of Lomonossoff.
relative rank and precedence to the members of the various
remplir de blanc les creux de sa peau."
Repose from labour, satire keen,
Removed her to his country seat,
Rescue me from oblivion.
Rousseau and Richardson to boot.
Reviews both dress and countenance,
Romances pleased her from the first,
"Say, of the two which was Tattiana?"
Scarcely in Russia can ye find
scientific and educational. The military and naval grades from
Scissors both straight and curved as well,
seductive feet apostrophized by the poet, since, in 1816, he wrote
Servant of God and brigadier,
seulement par l'embellissement de son teint, et pour avoir trouve
Shall abdicate the bard's profession,
Serve who could neither read nor write.
Shall my declining years beguile;
She drinks in those seductive deeds!
Lay languishing both day and night—
Lenski as a good match received,—
Like down from Aeolus's lip,
Like him renouncing vanity,
Lo! my Oneguine rural lord!
Long time her young imagination
Lo! on the sleeping river borne,
Mad spirit of the man who rhymes
Lost in the hamlet far away.
Many an ancient legend which
Men become friends from idleness.
marriages was regulated by Tsar Nicholas.
Men love no more, as only the
Mortally sick I am indeed.
Must e'en despise his kind at last;
Must be pronounced unfortunate—
Must now my stanzas occupy.
Mutual repulsion and ennui,
"My darling child, thou art in pain.—
My image hath not disappeared,
My mother-in-law who lately died34
Nearest and dearest knew not how
Ne'er touched her fingers indolent
Nor boston nor the world's affairs
No more with pale Diana's rays,17
Nor by her beauty she became
Ne'er trusted to the treacherous ace.
No fond illusions live to soothe,
Nor beauties of far distant lands
Nor by her sister's brilliancy
Nor homage which the Muse demands
Nor long his mind was agitated
Nor slander viciously could spread
Nor study, banquet, rout nor ball
Nor tender glance nor amorous sigh
Nor years of separation all
Note 16: Apropos of this somewhat ungallant sentiment, a Russian
Note 26: The Russian annotator remarks: "The most euphonious
Note 34: A young married couple amongst Russian peasants
Note 36: Courtships were not unfrequently carried on in the
Note: Istomina—A celebrated Circassian dancer of the day, with
Note 35: Marriages amongst Russian serfs used formerly to
note received an additional lot of the communal land for
Nought from his pen did ever flow,
Now all things round about repeat
Now her lithe form she arches o'er
occur to most that the apologist of the Russian fair "doth
Of course Tattiana was annoyed
Of rural life the sluggish stream;
Of thirty different sorts, lo! brushes
Oft staring through the window pane
Once more to idleness consigned,
Oneguine's speeches I abhorred
One image occupied his mind,
"Nurse, 'tis so close I cannot rest.
Obedient she had ever been
Obedient to warm Spring's commands.
only, as it is believed that agriculture in the north is so
Open the window—sit by me."
Oriental charm which so much captivated Madame de Stael." It will
Original imagination,
peasants, in order that the taxes, for which the whole Commune
protest too much." The poet in all probability wrote the offending
Raged round him and of balked desire!
Reduced with effort unto sense,
On Lenski's matrimonial fate
On unknown female forms he throws.
Or vainly 'mid luxurious fare
Poetic transport did infuse,
Polite demeanour to preserve,
Recent instructions of its mother.
refined eulogy of the excellent qualities of our countrywomen.
Relate some ancient history."
reside in the house of the bridegroom's father till the
Romance of love I pray refer,
Restless Tattiana sleepless lay
Russian ladies unite in their persons great acquirements,
Sails her allotted course on high,
She comprehends. The simple maid
scholiast remarks:—"The whole of this ironical stanza is but a
Seated, a curious look with glasses
She hears of conversation nought
She loved upon the balcony
Seems so unnatural and absurd:
seem to assume this virtue if they have it not, and we take their
She ne'er repeated unto hers.
She heaves a sigh and deep intent
She murmurs in an undertone
She rose—departed. But Eugene
She seeks the garden in her need—
She starts, nor doth a word express,
She the delicious novel reads,
She struggled hard at first thus pent,
She was thus fond of Richardson
"She who with melancholy face
"My heart's delight, thou art not well."—
My lot is fixed—with thoughtlessness
My splendid house and gaieties—
Nay, near—but destiny decreed—
Nor sparkled with poetic fire,
Nor wit, nor did the same inspire
Note 17: The midsummer nights in the latitude of St. Petersburg
Note 18: Refers to Mouravieff's "Goddess of the Neva." At St.
Note 19:
Now talkative, now reticent;
Note 20: The strong influence exercised by Byron's genius on the
Note 21: The poet was, on his mother's side, of African extraction,
Obedient to the magic strings,
O Brenta, once more we shall meet
Of Africa, ancestral land,21
"Oneguine, all this sumptuousness,
Note 25: From the lay of the Russalka, i.e. mermaid of the Dnieper.
Of dreary Russia left behind,
Of the night sentinels arise
Oneguine meditative stood,
One instrument for his own use—
On waves by tempests curdled o'er!
Note 37: It is thus that I am compelled to render a female
"Nurse, leave me. I would be alone.
Oblivion of life's tempest dire,
Of love which whilom Petrarch sung.
On horseback every day they ride—
Or ice and flame, are not diverse
Ourselves as unities to count;
Pen, paper bring: the table too
Perchance where Dunia pours out tea
Petersburg the banks of the Neva are lined throughout with
Possess my love and sympathy.
Rousseau, I would remark in passing,12
She soon forgot, began to call
She waited for—I don't know whom!
She wore her corset tightly bound,
She would pronounce à la Française;
Shifts, tacks about, until they prate
Shouts of applause! Oneguine passes
Sighs on another than her lord
signifies a nimbus or glory, and is the symbol of marriage
Since words like pantaloons, vest, coat,
Sleep in the shadowy couch enjoys,
So ancient warriors, battles o'er,
Snakes, satyrs, loves with many a shout
So ardently did I desire
So full of piety, correct,
So hearken, every worthy spouse,
So inaccessible to men,
So let us to the ball-room haste,
Some future ignoramus shall
source of inspiration. Even the poem in question cannot be
Still the loud stamping doth not cease,
Sudden she stops, casts down her eyes
"Svetlana" has been translated by Sir John Bowring.
"sviatki" or Holy Nights see Canto V. st. x, and the dreamer
take place at ridiculously early ages. Haxthausen asserts
Tattiana gazes on the moon,
Tattiana! sweet Tattiana, see!
Tattiana through the forest erred,
than the late Mr. Thomas Carlyle. The decadence of Richardson's
That bilberry wine, I'm sore afraid,
That hero, though his merit shone,
That like a friendly voice its tone
that strong hearty peasant women were to be seen at work
The bays of age and helplessness.
The Country Damsel
The curtain now they slowly raise.
The days which to your youth belong?
The deuce with my inside has played."
The drive becomes monotonous—
Should dearly like a dance again.
Slow circling round its fellow swings
Still everywhere, without, within,
Still they blow noses, cough, and sneeze,
Tell me at once what wilt thou have?
The aged nurse in ample gown,37
The evanescent fashions fly
The lamps illuminating shine;
Tattiana's beauty, pale with care,
The aged woman in her woe:
The excited hero in a trice
The fated nutriment desired;
Their heroes used to represent
Their idols they were wont to invest
"The Lord be with thee, O my daughter!"—
The friend of liberty and laws
The goddess would a masquerade
The hour when—Fate so willed—we met
Their coming which no man expects,
Their Jealousy and separation
their lot, and they bear the cold with a wonderful equanimity.
Their offspring's innocent flirtations
The Lord deliver her and save!
Then it may be, O flattering tale,
The olden time shall be my theme.
the married women, on the other hand, in two, which are twisted
The matchmaker a fortnight sped,
The monsters of the British Muse
The most industrious man alive
"Then amongst strangers I was left—
Then they came easily enow,
The passionate speeches I'll repeat,
The sleep-compelling Grandison,
The principal outlines of these three poems are as follows: A
the Russian poet has directly paraphrased "Leonora" under its
the state of the thermometer, cannot be said to have a jovial
The steed benumbed still pawing stands
The swain of Julia Wolmar,
The style in which my hero dressed;
The torment born of crime unseen,
the unpleasant bridegroom resorts to the graveyard and repairs to
The wedding-day had been arranged,
The world is ever altering!
Now it is ready to be sent—
O'erspread with Winter's carpet bright,
of general in the Russian service.
Of mines and meadows, woods and lakes,
Of creditors a hungry rout
Of roses to romancers dear;
Of the moon in the tranquil skies,
Oneguine—the beloved place
On him spleen mounted sentinel
On pit, stalls, boxes, brightly blaze,
Of what not, and of distant dim,
Or better,—like a faithful wife.
Or counting on his uncle's death
Park, garden, palings, yard below
Perused, Eugene in postchaise went
Pour on this orb a dazzling light
Seeing in this no deprivation,
Shall surely, be it soon or late,
She oped her eyes and cried: 'tis he!
Shy, silent did the maid appear
Since Eugene in that solitude
Tattiana in the young princess!
The Eternal Jew or the Corsair
The fatal hour had come at last—
The idols of their adoration
Their glory with their heels of red
The less we love a lady fair
The Lovelaces are out of date,
The house is crammed. A thousand lamps
The image of her seal impressed.
The letter is the thing, you see,—
The Maidens' Song
The inscription o'er the gates of Hell
The ladies' laughter to provoke.
The language of her girlish pleading
The mystic lines to tear away
The mystic monogram, O. E.
The imagination to enliven
The "in memoriam" pages sought,
Their own productions, some insist
The insensate fire of love still glowed
The morn arises foggy, cold,
The murmuring brook, the woodland shade,
The last poor obol I was worth—
The letter which Tattiana wrote.
The lively trash of stories long
The medium is required of gold.
The native Russian tongue impeach?
The natural fickleness of passion,
Then be it so! My destiny
Then dressed himself...*
The nightingale trills forth her tune;
Then, I say truly, none but thee
the "Nestor of the Arzamass" belonged, and their opponents who
Then get mad drunk or wroth; the day
"Then send your grandson quietly
Then suddenly discharge a joke
Then, then—well, in some solitude
Then to some gallant in your turn
Then touching Olga they depart
The pains of night have wholly fled,
The path of hope and tender fear—
The pine-torch, by her crackles bright.
The pompous, swaggering cuckold too,
"The post hath kept him, it is like."
There, aping Gulnare's bard, he spanned
There Didelot became glorious,
There is no fishmarket retort
There our Katènine did revive
There! take it quickly, if ye must.
There, there, beneath the side-scene's shade
The Russian language I deem vile
These are your relatives, believe:
The secrets of the marriage state
The shining river clothed in ice;
The silent fields no peasant nears,
The snow upon the streets doth melt—
'The Spleen'
There is no stupid calumny
The secrets of maidens.
The sneers of critics superfine;
The same warm vision constantly;
the stage in early life and married a Prince Gagarine.
The story of thy life and fate.
the style of La Fontaine's "Psyche." Its merit consists in
The thunderbolt on you descend!
The tiny sun shone less on high
The uncontaminated kiss
The wolf upon the highways bold
They disappeared by stealth and guile,
The sum of my existence gone
The third at night. Tattiana wakes
The time between the wolf and dogs—
The tiresome man, her value knowing,
The torrent of opinion,
The trees in silvery array,
The untutored spirit's pangs calmed down
They have invited you this week."
They long ago had held debate.
The triumph of a conquest new.
The vestibule finds empty quite—
They may forget that we exist.
"The younger, you're in love with her!"
The young Simeonova too there
The youthful lover once again
the youth's head and exclaimed: "Mon cher Tibulle." He is
They sang, whilst negligently seated,
They sent their compliments—but oh!
They were the wonderful traditions
They will receive us with delight."
They wish that ladies should, I hear,
They would not solemnly debate
Thine eye subdued me with strange glance,
Thinking to float upon the stream,
Thine honour is my countersign!
thirst for encyclopaedic knowledge without a corresponding power
This by command; for it was found,
This gentle daring who could guess?
This lot in life with stern decree?
This northern summer of our own,
this poem was written literary warfare more or less open was
Some a mazurka occupies,
So meantime let him joyous live
Some one or other editor
"Song and dance," the well-known "khorovod," in which the dance
Soon, of the tempest which hath fled
So prudent, and so circumspect
Sorrow to counterfeit and wail—
So uncongenial to my mind,
songs used with dishes of water during the "sviatki" or Holy
splendid granite quays.
stanza in a fit of Byronic "spleen," as he would most likely
Stately, devoid of prejudice,
Still happier he who ne'er hath known!
Spurs of the Cavalier Guard clash,
Still sovereigns of his spirit were,
Stood as estranged from all aloof,
Strange unto her each childish game,
Stood as if struck by lightning fire.
"sudarinia," i.e. sir or madam.
Straight from the ball to bed he goes,
Strictly the Carnival observed,
superstitious practice, which is not confined to Russia. See Note 52.
Suitable for this semi-Russian.
Sweet as the kiss of lovers sworn.
system, might lead to great abuses.
Such is the country custom good;
tastes, see his poem of "Angelo," founded upon "Measure for Measure."
Tattiana was her appellation.
Terrible tales she loved to hear.
Than one's own fascinating self.
That rascal Lovelace she abused;
The ancient barshtchina replaced
That a friend's arm in every case
That chosen heroes consecrate,
That vicious set whom I don't blame—
That I am rich, a prince's wife?—
the 14th up to the 7th confer personal nobility only, whilst
That my dishonour would ensure
The accents wild of other's woes,
The appointed hour arrives, arrives!
The bath on Saturdays attended,
The body they consigned to rest,
The bridegroom sage without delay
The captives of the Salguir's shore.22
The cold reply with gloomy mien
The child of sloth and liberty.
The contact of the foot I raised
The conversation tedious
Their claims and explanations shout.
The cool dark oaken grove to range,
The courtyard full of serfs he sees,
The feet of graceful ladies fly,
The fires of passion and its smart—
The fruits of learning and combined
The gifted songster never swerved,
The girl in marriage they unite.
The happiest days of life employ?
The height of fashion, fitting tight,
The neighbourhood fresh sport derived.
"Then, in the country, is't not true?
Their privileged allurements fire
Then became busy with the house,
Then, her distraction to allay,
The obrok was a species of poll-tax paid by a serf, either
The path which leads to glory's goal.
The peasant blessed his happy fate.
The pervert world with icy chill
The proud ones are not worth the fire
The converse of our hermits twain,
The crowd and merriment and light,
The cynosure of every eye.
The days of love and of romance!
The drum already doth arouse.
The early days of life we sought.
The epitaph on marble shows:
The fatal secrets of the grave,
The fervid poet would recite,
The final two lines refer to the "Tchin," or Russian social
The hero's name too in advance,
The firmament in mellow light,
The fruits of science, evil, good,
The horizon luminous doth grow,
The German baker looks around
Their looks alone produce the spleen.16
Their memory lingers still and seems
The gilding of life's vanities,
Their giddy sports she ne'er enjoyed.
Their noisy laugh her soul annoyed,
The kennel or a kindred line,
The lonely mansion-house to screen
The matter did not agitate,
The gossip of their ladies fair.
The gulf between them was so vast,
The laws of generations past,
The love, hate, sorrow, joy, we feel.
The Medal Otchakoff conferred!29
The moon, the lamp of heaven above,
The moon, the stars, and shining night—
The Muse appeared, when love passed by
Then seeks ancestral sepulchres,
Then ye were barely generous,
The passage containing the reference to the three tears and
The Okhtenka with pitcher speeds,15
The Russian N with nasal sound
The steward sent a note to tell
There jars of cider block the way,
The riot of the world and glare
The shopman and the pedlar rise
The story of his young love's dream,
The ladies, their fantastic dress,
The malady of hopeless love
The manners of the highest class
The moderns of the ancients rave—
The nights of golden Italy
The poet's fervid conversation
The shutters open; to the skies
The sorrows of a single state.
The style of wise antiquity.
the Winter Palace to the Summer Palace and Garden.
There long time sad at heart he stayed:
The Russian peasants are childishly fond of whirligigs, which
The starry beacons fade away,
The wit of others to acquire.
They met. Earth, water, prose and verse,
The tale of these romantic men;
The thirst for fame and man's applause,
The voice of jealousy is drowned.
The words and looks of charmers sweet
The workpeople she superintended,
The works of Mr. Richardson.
They blossom, ripen and they fall
They in a peaceful life preserved
They made him feel inclined to doze;
They crack a feeble joke and smile—
They growl a bit—they scandalise—
The young proprietor we find;
The youthful poet's fond confession.
They stir the heart as heretofore.
The needle nor, o'er framework bent,
Then they're so innocent of vice,
Then would we muse as in a trance,
The Poet
the poet. The former line indicates the Prisoner of the
The prejudices all men have,
There friends of pure delight had been
The sudden rattling of a car.
The very morning of our days.
The village wherein yawned Eugene
The votary of vain delight
The world enough. Congratulate
Thinking: 'tis foolish to disturb
Thirty thousand Turks are said to have perished during the
This anchorite amid his waste
This great discovery relief
This evanescent boyish bliss.
This glitter, riot, emptiness,
This he believed: a kindred spirit
This was his social character.
This life in masquerade concealed,
This nonsense, that dishonest seems,
This wicked, that absurd he deems,
This world. I do not praise desire,
Those feet? Alas! on what far strand
Those whom we ought to love, caress,
Thou also, my ideal true,
Thou didst to me in dreams appear,
Thou fairy-land! Where formerly
Though Baratynski verses penned,45
Though beauty he no more adored,
Though certainly mankind he knew
Though, God be praised! he ne'er designed
Though hitherto a lady ne'er
Though I confess I hardly dare
Though now my love might be intense,
Though scarcely following what was said,
Though some men, evilly disposed,
Though without palaces and streets,
Thou hast resigned thy destiny
Thou'lt quaff love's sweet envenomed stream,
Thou'lt suffer, dearest, but before,
Three mortal hours per diem he
Three balls a year he gave ye duly,
Three pairs of handsome female feet;
Three tears they dropt with humble mein
Thrice happy who their agonies
Through clouds of dust at postal pace,
Through park and meadow, wood and brake,
Though superannuated rather;
Though to the Academy I come
Thus a guest with composure will
Thus carelessly I once portrayed
Though we, of Hymen foes, meanwhile,
Though we will not acknowledge it.
Thus did our friend Oneguine preach:
Thus having braved Apollo's rage
Thus in the earth the seed expands
Thus age approached, the common doom,
Thus Boileau, in the guise of invective, eulogizes Louis XIV.
Thus mused a madcap young, who drove
Thus oft—this I myself confess—
Thus our light race grows up and lives,
Thus thou, Yazykoff, dost arise46
Thus to assassinate the eve?"—
Till January fell no snow—
'Tis silent—on her shines the moon—
"tiaglo," or family circle is broken up by his death.
Tiers Etat? Nothing. What ought it to be? Everything." He
Till morn—life uniform but gay,
Time, I invoke thee! favouring gales
'Tis dark. He seats him in a sleigh,
Till carriage lamps, a double row,
Time without me will lessons give,
Tired by the ball's incessant noise,
'Tis a Madonna of Vandyk,
"'Tis habit, Lenski."—"Is your ill
'Tis silent all! Alone the cries
'Tis something of this sort I deem.
'Tis time to quit this weary shore
Tobacco smoke the flue ascends,
To-day it is my turn to teach.
To-morrow just like yesterday.
To anticipate the break of day,
To cool the cutlets' seething grease,
To cope with Ay no more I dare,
Thus, praised be God! a reputation
Thus shakes the hare when suddenly
Thus shines the wretched butterfly,
Thus the time passes and meanwhile
Thus trees in spring their leaves renew
Thus we began our little tale—
Thy cheek is as a poppy red!"
Thy meditative incantation—
Till absently Vladimir took
Till proper rings could be procured.
Till the fire in her cheek decreased;
Till out of breath upon a seat
Time flies! a genial air abroad,
time of it. But in this, as in other cases, "habit" alleviates
time: the former by Madame Cottin, the latter by the famous
Time was, the poet's tender quill
Time was, a valiant general might
Time was, in style magniloquent
Time was when cold seduction strove
Time will the ravages efface—
Tiresome unto her hath become
'Tis day, the family downstairs,
'Tis finished. Horrible to read!
'Tis evidently Heaven's will
'Tis foreign to my cast of thought;
'Tis Heaven's will and I am thine.
'Tis in your power now, if desired,
'Tis said you are a misanthrope,
'Tis time for supper, now for bed,
"'Tis time, my child, arise, I pray!
'Tis time she to the altar went!
'Tis yes! no! never madam! sir!"24
To-day, my friends, at any rate,
To agitate me in my dreams.
to all appearances as if in the flesh, who induces the unfortunate
To all good neighbours' sport conduced.
To a surrender gave consent,
To array himself in evening dress.
To cheat the inexperienced fair,
To dominate her worthy lord,
To foreign lands he would allude,
Together they returned, nor word
To lawless love I should prefer—
To be a charming mystery:
To crush me with a just disdain.
To exile self-consigned,
To his Penates now returned,
To kiss the feet which I admired!
To listen to the rippling rill.
To listen to the words you speak,
To male acquaintances he bows,
To dire contentment shall give birth
To dreams I long have closed mine eyes,
To Dunia then they whisper: Mind!
To fawn upon and love express;
To dream upon the sunny strand
To ease the anguish of my breast.
To me he would his Olga give,
To part in amity with thee!
Together we have wandered o'er
To guess how you the eve pull through."—
To idle musing was a prey;
Told me to ask you. Ere that date
To loiter there in idleness
to procure them, at any rate in the large towns.
Trinity Sunday was at first deemed irreligious by the Russian
Twice in the year to fast were bound,
Upon a bunch of lovage green;
To move in fashionable life,
To Olga frequently he would
To my old nurse alone peruse,
Too much I'm given to intersperse,
Torquato Tasso's strains I deem.
Tortured by pangs of wild regret,
To russify the foreign phrase
To secrets of virgins,
To see you by our fireside stand,
To sigh and meditate alone:
To sketch myself that I have tried
To slay himself with blade or ball,
To standards in which we believe?
To purest love he tuned his note
To romp and play she ne'er would go:
To Russ indigenous are not;
To such—delightful to repel.
To take this letter to O— Well!
To the sarcastic observation,
To wander through the meadows still,
To whisper comfort, love and hope?
To whom are our misfortunes grief
To whom we used to consecrate
To witticisms and taunts half-vicious
To write of any other elf
'Twas dusk! Upon the table bright
Transported to our Russian clime.
'Twas not the first time, I can tell
'Twas she who first within his breast
Trembles upon my lips from spite,—
'Twas plain—an oaken floor ye scan,
'Twas then he loved the tangled grove
'Twas these he read and these alone
Two hearts, a torch, of flowers a wreath,
Two verses he could recollect
Upon my lake I love to float,
Upon the Don's broad pastures bred
une petite vergette faite exprès, ouvrage qu'il continua fièrement
Unseen in thick and tangled grass
Upon its damp opacity,
Upon the dreary northern snows,
Upon the windows tracery,
urn for hot water having a fire in the center. We may observe
Us from the world wherein we live.
V
unquestionable. It undoubtedly owes its origin to Burger's poem
unremunerative that land has often to be forced upon the
Upon her elbow she reclines,
Unto our neighbour. Mind you tell—
Upon her tongue which fever bakes.
Upon the ball-room's glassy floor
Upon your daughters keep an eye,
V
V
Verses and tears et cetera.
very far north, though an inhabitant of our own kitchen gardens.
VI
VI
Viewed them with not a little scorn,
VII
VI
VII
VII
To vary for a few brief days.
To write in cantos twenty-five.
To youthful Olga's beauty bright,
transitory nature of merely mediocre literary reputation. One
"'Twas possible then, happiness—
Two cupboards, table, soft divan,
Unerring critics self-esteemed,
Unknown as yet the aching heart,
Unseen thou wast already dear.
Until her heart less high should bound—
Unto a ruthless tyrant dread.
Unto his neighbour, man of thrift,
Upon the opening page ye find:
Upon the stage his weary glance.
Upon those pages she descries
utterances under its influence for what they are worth.
Vice had due punishment awarded,
Urging your droshkies swift as air
VIII
Vice in romance is glorified
VIII
Virtue was with a bride rewarded.
VII
VIII
VIII
Villages in the distance show
Virgins miraculous I see,
Vladimir, hourly more a slave
Vladimir Lenski visited
Vladimir Lenski was his name,
Vladimir something curtly said
Waiting his coming—his alone!
War."
"warmer of the soul"—in French, chaufferette de l'âme. It
Was a delightful little spot,
Was born beside the Neva, where
was but fifty years ago, and had he lived to a ripe old age he
Was certainly no Grandison.
Was certainly not erudite
was dissolved and a heavenly one was contracted.
Was ready for self-sacrifice,
was seized on the coast of Africa when eight years of age by a
Was younger than myself, my light,
We are the first who such a name
Weeping they loosed my tresses long36
We hear with interest intense
We must admit but little taste
"We never loved in days of old,
Was drawn, ideal of my lay—
Was he in health and void of care?—
Was it not thou who thus didst stoop
Was it not thou, O vision bright,
Was nothing but the British spleen
Was that which we are wont to call
Was the meek love a maiden feels.
We all of us of education
"Well!"—"I the elder should prefer,
Well! Làrina appears to us
Were I like you a bard by trade—
To shallow sentiment a slave!
To swagger as the art of love,
To take a hand at whist oft come:
To the fair object of his dream,
To the impressions of our youth,
To the theatre he repairs
To whom amongst the jealous throng
"To whom is it to go, my sweet?
To whom ye for unnumbered crimes
To whom your hearts were consecrate,—
Tranquilly goes to sleep at home,
Transparent o'er the Neva beamed
treats the embryo enterprise as if already conducted to a
'Twas built, the venerable pile,
Two minutes they in silence spent,
ultimately experienced the common destiny in those days, was thrown
Upon the table in a trice
Unto his own Tattiana he,
Upon the earth a mist did lie
Upward in a thin stream inclines.
Upon the fields of Mars a gallant warrior,
V
VI
Von Wisine, friend of liberty,
Vows matrimonial to break,
Walking? The landscape tires the eye
Was it not so?—for thee I gave,
Was worthy of that old baboon,
We called to mind our youthful days—
Were stripped with melancholy sound,
What are they? Gladly would I yield
To thy decree my will I bend.
Until the sleepless Breguet chime7
Were you in love when you were young?"—
We visit about Christmas Day,
Upon the highway of the sea
Were to analysis subjected.
Werther, rebellious martyr bold,
"What ails thee, dear?"—"I feel depressed.
What a storm of emotions keen
What bitter tears with thee I shed!
What boots it with the age to strive?
"What can be drearier than the house,
What everybody long has known;
What I by relatives conceive?
What, invitations? The same day
What jokes and guesses now abound,
What languor would his silence show,
What is thy cleverness to me?
What more's required? The world replies,
What never was remarked or heard
What once I knew is clean forgot—
What pleasures Hymen would prepare
What! really going? 'Tis too bad!
When angry beat her maids, I grieve,
What they in conversation said?—
What visions then her fancy thronged—
When but a boy he Olga loved
When captured in a schoolboy's cap;
Whene'er a brilliant courtly dame
Whene'er he had an aching head;
When Eugene like a ghost did rise
When evening o'er the landscape looms,
When Friendship smiled or Love caressed.
When harsh demeanour hath consigned
When in as instant she is lost,—
When in simplicity ye wrote
When o'er a glass with friends we prate
When on the pallid eastern sky
When people with long countenance
When separation's hour drew nigh,
When Passion's fire no longer glows
When poets lachrymose recite
When shall I wing my passage free
When, sitting by his fire alone
When that time comes, a poem I'll strive
When the same life before him lies
When the sonorous Breguet tells
When the obedient doll in sport
When, where, and in what desert land,
When will my hour of freedom come!
When will the devil take his own!"
When, wise at length, we seek repose
When youth's rebellious hour drew near
Where art thou? Come! pretensions mine
Where each young critic ready stands,
Where fashionable circles meet
Wherefore am I your quarry held?—
Where God alone knows whom she met.
Where I can no more recollect?—
Wherein I buried left my heart.
Wherein I felt love's fatal dart,
Wherein my poor old nurse doth lie
Wherein love innocently pines.
Wherein the child of fashion strict
Wherein the miserable wife
Where plentifully feelings flow
Wherein we lately left the twain.
Where—"—"What! another eclogue spin?
Which falls in starry flakes below.
Which glowed with virginal desire.
Which never have existed, e'en
which Pushkin himself together with his uncle Vassili Pushkin
Which rushed in eager dense array
Which shines with iridescent hues.
Which we experienced long ago.
Where is Oneguine? Half asleep,
Where the first time I saw your face,—
Which 'neath her pillow lay till morn.
Which to the neighbouring alley leads,
Whilst all creation seemed to dream
Whilst Eugene condescending quite,
Whilst nearer, sunk in deeper shade,
Whilst homeward by the nearest route
Whilst Petersburg from slumber deep
Whilst the fond parents, friends thro' life,
Whilst the tired serving-men without
Where is he who doth not deceive?
Where long time he in solitude
Where many another hand had signed
Where melancholy rocks arise
Where sometime Goethe, Schiller sung,
Which afterwards the muse revived.
Which all her darling friends have scrawled
which, at all events in its earlier developments, was of an
Which from the devil's bookcase start,
Which might for many ages last.
Which Ovid once immortalized,
Which your true friend with a sweet smile
Whilst cheerily the embers shone,
Whither along them doth he pelt?
Whither at headlong speed doth go
"Whither away? Deuce take the bard!"—
Whither shall he go first? He'll see,
Whither that evening he will go.
Whither shall my rapscallion flit?
Who art thou? Guardian angel sent
Who cannot conjure former joys?
Who every gesture, every phrase
Who floats contentedly through life,
Who following Petrarch move along
Who for the greenwood quits his tower,
Who, heard the music of my lay,
Who in the agony of grief
Who in the orchards gathered fruit,
Who in thy love finds more delight
Who knows? with love's consuming flame
Who labours hard to humour us?
Whom, as the custom is of men,
Whom doth thy plaintive Muse adore?
Whom latterly one often meets
Who reads his visionary theme
Whose author nature understood
Whom hath thy strain immortalized?
Whom jealous transport cannot move,
Who secretly denounced the gift,
Whose hands indulgently caress
Whose memory doth not refuse
Whose qualities appeared to afford
whom the poet in his extreme youth imagined himself in love.
Whom vice, if named, doth agitate
Whose glance reflecting inspiration
Whose heart experience icy made
Who now could fail to recognize
Whose brain no fond illusions daze,
Whose hearts responsive have remained
Who selfishly unmoved remain
Whose tones Apollo's sons inspire,
"Who will be there?"—"The family.
Who without more prevarication
Who words and actions will adjust
"Why, as God ordered! My Ivan
Who the romance do not complete,
Who this soft nonsense could impart,
Why is Tattiana guiltier deemed?—
Will be ascribed by treacherous Fame
Who welcome guests with zeal extreme,
Why did you visit our poor place?
Will he pursue?—But no one came.
Will pass; the same to-morrow try—
Will not, preserved by kindly Fate,
Will teach grammatical conceits,
Will to the old times faithful be.
Will you?"—"Agreed."—"I thank you, friend,"
Winter resigned her empire white,
Journeys and warriors to wed.
Just as he entered. How severe!
journeys may be easily conceived.
Just manages a feeble trot
Just at this moment I cannot.
Just placed the entrance door ajar.
"kashourka," or "kitten song," indicates approaching marriage. It
Kibitkas three, the accustomed train,71
Killed! at this dreadful exclamation
Known unto children perfectly:
Know that thy face that day I see.
L
Ladies in crowds around her close,
Lament, embrace upon that grave.
Lamp-posts, shops, sledges, families,
'La, sotto giorni nubilosi e brevi,
Lay all the girls by sleep embraced,
Latest arrivals' salutations,
Lead into good society,
Leaning against the dam expects,
Leisurely through the gateway glides.
"leleyat" to fondle or soothe, likewise with our own word
Lenski his comrade did invite.
Lenski, into confusion thrown,
Lenski replied, and soon they be
Lenski that eve in thought immersed,
Lenski the foeman's apparition
Lenski the stroke could not sustain,
Lenski, unhappy victim, fell,
Lest the world or her lord divine
Let me explain that in my song
Let not the poet's spirit freeze,
Let us congratulations pay
Let us go seek a little rest—
Let us proceed unto a rill,
LI
Life lies extended, vast and bright,
Lifts not her eyes which swimming fail.
Light sallies without coxcombry,
LII
Like a full moon magnificent.
Like Delvig when dinner doth inspire.
Like Horace, planted cabbages,
Like love, another sort of knavery!
Like smoke athwart the heaven blue;
Lo! with what pride celestial
Maids in the corner whisper low;
Moscow's young Graces at her stare,
Mournful is thine approach to me,
Mutual destruction to contrive.
"My second!" cried in turn Eugene,
My spirit and my blood doth move,
My word of honour given have I.
Lo! poured in a thin gray cascade,
Loud paws the earth each panting horse,
Malignant fury they disclose,
Measured with great exactitude.
Most carefully Zaretski placed
My poor Vladimir! In the tomb,
My pretty self-deceiving maid—
Near young Tattiana resident,
No longer through her former home;
"Look quickly to your left, my sweet!"
Mark ye with what a modest air
Meals, secrets, occupations shared?
More advantageously appear
Moscow
"No matter, look immediately.
No more the village knows his face,
No obstacle of which I know.
No one the contrary will urge,
Moscow, Russia's darling daughter,
My friends, the poet ye regret!
No more remembered him; unto
Nor aught confides unto the rest.
Nor true unto her sorrow kept.
My memory wandered wide and sought
Obedient then to Nature's law,
My poor Vladimir, bitter tears
Never upon my heroine
Not agony, but death expressed.
Of conversation, thought and aims—
Of woe: effaced the pathway now:
Of youthful impulse, reverie,
Nor even tears afford respite,
No sense was ever manifest
Note 60: Francesco Albano, a celebrated painter, styled the "Anacreon
Now, as in a deserted house,
Now, like hereditary foes,
Of a strange night when the moon and—
Of bassoons and of flutes the strain.
Of consolation all bereft—
O feet, where'er your path extends
Of languor and of love did tell
Of Levshin's school ye followers,67
of Painting," was born at Bologna 1578, and died in the year 1666.
Of thy delights I drank my fill,
Note 67: Levshin—a contemporary writer on political economy.
Note 68: The crown used in celebrating marriages in Russia
Note 76: One of the obscure satirical allusions contained in this
Of which the rustling woods remind?
Ombre, and whist all others worth:
Once more, when she appeared in sight,
Oneguine fired—Alas! alas!
Oneguine slowly then began
Oneguine went with trepidation
Only her countenance assumed
On us beyond the grave attends,
On whom a sister's heart was set
Or any trifle else ye like
Or, beyond Lethe lulled to rest,
Or but for fame he saw the light;
Or even overcome by wrath
Or, heedless of the leaves' return
Or, it may be, the bard had passed
Or, it may be, we inly seek,
Or e'en Istomina, my dear,
Or, strange to me is happiness?
Or, when anew all Nature teems,
O Spring, thou chosen time of love!
Outlandish and provincial,
Pair after pair the race sustain.
Paris and Menelaus right.
Passed into dull eternity,
Pelagie Nikolavna has
Perchance to benefit mankind,
Placed at the customary range;
poem. Doubtless the joke was perfectly intelligible to the
Poetical enthusiast,
Priams of country populations
Questions and news and tittle-tattle,
Remains on earth the unseemly rage,
Reform me both in deed and word,
Resounding through all ages might
Scornfully challenged you afield—
Secure in rural quietude—
Quick to the country let us wend
Repose in peace, thou child of song."
Seeks, winding amid meadows still,
Seemed in a haze of green embowered.
See the first canto if ye will,
She bows her head beneath the crown;68
Should make me much more circumspect,
"Shall we commence?"—"Let it be so,"
She buries deep within her breast
She never more his face may view,
She wanders aimless as a sprite,
Simeon Petròvitch just as shabby;
Since leisure was together spent,
So 'twas with us in former years,
Speech was so tame and colourless
Spring's paramour, pours forth her song
Spring summons you to her green bowers,
Sweet to behold him obstinate,
Tattiana thanks to all returned,
Tattiana would have gladly heard
So from the mountain lazily
Some other long-departed Spring,
Soon Olga's accents shrill resound
Still eats and drinks enough for twain.
Spoiled children most degenerate
Squeeze tiny hands and osculate;
Still of his club he member was—
Successfully to please her tried,
Sweeter it is, my friends, if he
Tattiana by a poor aunt's side,
Tattiana gently led them there.
Tell me, of sentiments concealed
Tender and elevated, free?
Terpsichore alone among
Than cold Oneguine's oddities,
That for that matter in my verse
That, for the century designed,
That heart with inspiration sweet
The aged mother, bathed in tears,
The altar flame was quenched in night.
The avalanche of snow first bends,
The aspect of a landscape drear.
The ball in all its splendour shone.
The bee forth from his cell of wax
The blessings of humanity.
The blood boiled and the passions strove.
The breath of Spring again renewed,
The coming of life's Autumn drear.
The comrade of your youth should strike,
The converse of the world polite,
The crash of music, candles' glare
"The date, his fleeting years how long—
Thee but a little space bewept,
The blood gushed from the wound and steamed
The chaise long ordered please employ,
The cold sweat bursting from his brow,
The connoisseur his glances throws
Their harmless conversation blends
The jealous dame her lorgnette veers,
The manly toga scarce assumed,
The moment for revenge, meanwhile,
Then glittering in the sun descends.
The eyes of a grave general.
The feet of my dear lady friends.
The fire extinguished in his breast,
The foes, as yet not taking aim,
The foes with downcast eyes abide.
The fountain brawls, sweetbriers bloom,
The glass unwittingly inspect
The heavens shone in deeper blue,
Their voices nought to her impart
The languid mind could smile at nought,
"The left? Why, what on earth is there?"—
The Muse abandoned, ta'en a wife,
The nightingale there all night long,
The Paris of those country parts
Then to reward such confidence
The poet fell; already men
The poet, modest though so grand,
The poet's hour hath sounded—See!
The perfidies I recollect
There, in that knot of company,
The inmate is for ever dumb,
Their daughters kiss Tattiana fair.
Their insolence and waistcoats white
Their slander e'en was weariness;
The ladies' dresses airy, light,
The lancer, to his calling bound,
The mallet loud the ramrod strikes,
The memory of the bard was driven
The motley moving mass and bright,
The Muse capricious let us coax,
Then handed her the song with grace.
The peace which on his forehead beamed,
The poet from Tamboff secured,
The powder in the pan is laid,
The reaping girls approach and ply
There is a spot the village near
There'll be a fight. I do not lie.
There is no wreath upon the bough:
Thereon the passing traveller read:
There the confusion, pressure, heat,
There the tired ploughman loves to lie,
The river through the linden wood.
There, when the rains of spring we mark
The same unmoved oblivion
These friends cold-bloodedly draw near
The sharp flint, screwed securely on,
The shining pistols are uncased,
The snows from off the hills around
Lived as a really wise man ought,
Lo! compassed by his grove of oaks,
Long ceased to be a reading man,
Long in this fashionable cell
Long, long the hour had past when home
Long since I held thee at the font—
Longtime her tears flowed thick and fast;
Looks upon all with absent gaze
Loud snores the cumbrous Poustiakoff
Love's tender transports and distress,
Long time in meditation deep
Lord Byron's portrait on the wall
Luceria Lvovna paint applies,
made of the inner bark of the lime tree.
Made revelations undesigned,
Maid whom my heart desires alone,
makes use of an identical phrase in describing an occasion
Malicious and a slanderer.
Matrons unto the fireplace go,
Meagre, within a draughty hut,
Meantime a Cyclops of those parts
Method was dear unto his heart
Mikhailovskoe, 1826: the two final stanzas were, however,
Mends with the Russian hammer's blows
Men will forget me, but my urn
Miraculously fair arise,
More clearly, God be praised, the man,
Moscow approach on bended knees,
Moscow! How much is in the phrase
Moscow. The Kremlin itself is however by far the most interesting
Moscow, how oft in evil days,
Mountains we'll level and through deep
Must bow in common courtesy;
My frivolous and jolly youth.
My poor Tattiana cannot sleep
Nags eighteen to the door are driven.
national costume. Most Englishmen, if we were to replace
Near Khariton's in a side street
Neighbour by neighbour sat and snored,
Never for me to reappear—
Nor the first snow of winter seize
Nor the frost particles inhale
Note 61: Hospitality is a national virtue of the Russians. On
Note 63: A line of Griboyedoff's. Woe from Wit.
Note 64: The fact of the above words being italicised suggests
Note 65: Lepage—a celebrated gunmaker of former days.
Note 72: This somewhat musty joke has appeared in more than one
Note 66: In Russia and other northern countries rude shoes are
Note 69: The Russians not unfrequently adorn their apartments
Note 75: The first line refers to the prevailing shape of the
Not only sorrow—Ah! my dear,
Napoleon tarried till it please
Nasce una gente a cui 'l morir non duole.'
No senseless fashionable lay
Note 71: In former times, and to some extent the practice still
Not bristled up like a wild beast,
Note 62: There must be a peculiar appropriateness in this expression
Note 73: The aspect of Moscow, especially as seen from the Sparrow
Nought of its charms original
Now for the jealous youth what joy!
No gift she bears, no feast proclaims,
Noise, laughter, bowing, hurrying mixt,
Nor enough strength of mind possessed
Nor shall the bud of yesterday
Nor shall the caterpillar come
Not a mere hot, pugnacious boy,
Note 70: "Mátushka," or "little mother," a term of endearment
Not even a poetic phrase,
Note 74: Napoleon on his arrival in Moscow on the 14th September
Not so! My Moscow never went
Now gloomy seemed and cheerful now,
Now I am fit for nothing here.
Now of a family the head,
object to the stranger.
O'er hillock and o'er meadow throws.
Of churches, gardens, belfries high
Of foreign whims the impersonation—
Of her provincial innocence
Of modern Russians the disease.
Of priceless value all things seem
"Oh! how our years are vanishing!"
Olga and Tania led. Malign,
Olga ran skipping from the door.
Olga with trepidation dire.
"Olinka is her junior, see.
On chairs in the saloon reposed,
Oneguine his excuses says;
Oneguine Olga bore away.
Oneguine waits on us, 'tis like."
On everything around her gaze,
On thigh or temple, friend on friend.
On Sundays by yon window he,
On thee I used to meditate!
Opens unto her visitor.
Oppressive now is happiness,
Openly or 'neath decent cloak.
Or parody of modern ways?
Or reconciled them, it may be,
Our dear old aunt, Princess Helène,
O'er my remains to drop a tear,
Of Volga fishermen doth sing,
Of what he thought and what believed,
Oneguine, by first impulse moved,
Olga he sees before his eyes
Oneguine's pencillings. His mind
Oneguine was the most impressed,
Our bridges long neglected rot,
One moment's slumber suffer not.
Our idol, Honour's motive force,
Our youthful wanderer should roam.
Oneguine to the window went
O yes! my hopes soon disappeared."
Past palaces and nunneries,
perhaps worthy of remark, as one amongst numerous circumstances
Pervaded with much common sense.
Past women, sentry-boxes, rolls,
Perceived that he was still beloved,
Perish when half disclosed its bloom!"—
Petòushkoff met the selfsame doom.
Petrovski Palace; come, astir!
Of life or death predestinate.
Of serfs the farewell wail have given.
"Oh! I remember, where is he?"—
Old women at the coachmen swear.
Olga began to long likewise
"Oh! whither have ye winged your way,
Oneguine, bored to death again,
On iron bridges we shall gaze
Or if he meant to flirt again,
Or innocently past me fly.
Our roads transformed the eye will strike;
Petrarch
Petrovski Palace! Gloomily
Please follow this way, lady mine,
poet complains in a subsequent stanza there were no inns;
Portmanteaus and preserves in jars,
Portrayed contemporary man
"Princesse, mon ange!"—"Pachette!"—
Remarkable. She then indeed
Romances three, in which ye scan
"Sit down. How funny, to be sure!
So be it! Just the laws which bid
Still certain authors, I may add,
"Tania, my eldest child, you know"—
The bard of Juan and the Giaour,
The fatal bullet penetrate,
Proceeds, until she from a hill
proving how extensively the poet interwove his own life-experiences
reign of Catherine the Second. The witticism ran thus: A
Pskoff.
Quarrels among young friends he bred
remove to the Petrovski Palace or Castle on account of the
Repose her silken curtains fled,
Saucepans and mattresses and chairs,
Seen all, beside himself with wrath,
Replaced them in their box, undressed
Resolved the flirt to cast away,
separate the residences of the gentry. Still, the alacrity with
Shall I behold thee once again?"—
"Shall I proceed, or homeward flee?
She could not sleep in her new bed.
She enters a deserted yard—
Round which revolves the universe.
Russians are fond of tame birds—jackdaws, pigeons, starlings,
Sed alia tempora. And bravery
She fears she cannot.—Cannot? Why?—
Scarce credits what his eyes can see.
See, I can hardly crawl about—
seem literally tipped with flame. It was from this memorable spot
Sees where a noble mansion stood,
Seven days and nights the travellers plod.
She gazed thereon, and instant beat
She hid the trouble of her breast,
She promised Eugene, or she would
She the acquaintances she loves,
So Tania to her heart's content
So, when he came next day to call,
Slept o'er the river misty grown.
Soon the maid on a chair he seats,
Subdued him, when his neighbour stept
Tattiana as enchanted stood;
Tattiana's eyes with tender gleam
She found herself alone at last,
She gazed—a cue, forgotten long,
She hesitates, in doubt is thrown—
She was as heedless and as gay—
Shines in the female firmament
Should go, the market for a maid,
Should recompense his idle jeers,
Simple and kindly and unwed,
Since in these arms I thee did bear—
Spectacles upon nose, all day
Streams excavate subaqueous ways,
Tania, observed by nobody,
Tattiana from the hill descends
Tattiana saw with trepidation
Sincerely loving him, Eugene
Slumber still o'er him lingering flies.
Some madrigal not worth a rush,
Stops at the tomb in passing by;
Tattiana asks, and hurriedly
That he was "ready any day."
Surveying them, she thus doth say:
Tattiana learns the intelligence—
Tattiana suffered secretly;
That certain volumes she might read.
That grandmothers and grandsires may
That soon I reach my thirtieth year?
That the two friends with morning's light
That, tipsy once in actual fight,
That vanished are my youthful days
Tattiana tears cannot restrain.
That every morn at Verrey's cost
that Napoleon and the Grand Army first obtained a glimpse at the
That youthful heart—"But, now at least,
the accommodation of forty or fifty guests would somewhat
The bard his answer waits at home,
The beldam saith: "The hearth, by it
The calm existence which I prize
The chairs are thrust back with a roar,
The curs away to kennel chase,
The damsel under escort place.
The channel of the river stilled
the city, on the road to Tver, i.e. to the northwest. It is
The coach before a house stood still.
The early tinkling of the bells
The maiden at her casement sits
The family of children hie.
The fatal tubes Lepage contrived65
The household troop of little boys,
The maiden's weary eye which yearned,
The master always used to sit.
The memory of the bard, a dream,
The coach is borne o'er ruts and holes,
The Duel
The fisher's fire afar illumes
The house and garden I would see."
the idea that the poet is here firing a Parthian shot at some
The landscape which the moonbeams fret,
The moon in the blue atmosphere.
Then, eyeing Olga, whispers low:
Then the old dames in chorus sing,
Then weeping she sank back distressed
The pall of night was growing thin,
The parquet cracked beneath the heel,
The pile of books, with carpet spread
The princess from the sofa cried
The river's bank. Tattiana lone
The room my former master used.
The sharp incisions of his nail,
The shepherd plaits his shoe of bark,66
The simple epitaph—a tear
The stomach doth admonish us.
The table with its lamp unlit,
The tightened leathern rein she draws,
The twilight pale which softens all,
The weary way still incomplete,
The storm was hushed. The blossom fair
The strange apartment her oppressed:
The time for mystic strolls which late
The two old ladies then embraced
They long at home have her expected—
The sun had mounted high his steep,
The tea, as I remarked, appeared,
The thirst of knowledge and of fame,
The voice of lovers, foes and friends,
The woods, still naked to the view,
They deem her somewhat finical,
This is my master's sitting-room.
This joking I used to protest,
Thither hussars on leave will stray
The valleys dried and gaily flowered;
Thither in future to proceed
Though around honoured Priam's throne
Though for his Helen Menelaus
Though of romance therein I fail
Thus in a style obscure and stale,64
Thus widely meditation erred,
Thy heroes, sanguinary wights,
Thy Venus and thy Jupiter,
Till the mazurka's close he stays,
'Tis a scene of romance, I vow!"
'Tis here he slept, his coffee took,
The whirlwind of the waltz sweeps by,
The windows whitened, shutters close—
The witching light of sympathy;
Thou also, reader generous,
Though by an error and unsought—
Though he advanced unceasingly.
Thy dove, thy darling little pet
Time to denote by dinner, tea,
Time was, the breath of early dawn
Time was, two maidens from their home
'Tis done. To supper they proceed.
'Tis not so now. Like gentle dames
'Tis now the season! Idlers all,
'Tis sweet the foe to aggravate
'Tis there that arrant fops display
'Tis the warm time of labour, flowers;
"'Tis time to get up! Seven doth strike.
The counsel good and full of reason,
The crowd unto the drawing-room speeds,
The date was fixed though oft postponed,
The epistle from the bard presents.
The foaming Lenski would refuse,
The hoar-frost glitters: all rejoice
The freshness of her heart impair,
The hamlet, the poor villagers,
The household property contain:
The flimsy wares of Western marts,
The hussar Pykhtin was accused.
Their natural attractions lend
The journey in a sledge doth please,
The Làrinas unwisely went,
The limits of enlightenment
The little solitary nook
The man and liked his company,
The lily's stem to eat away,
The matter by his conscience tried,
The miserable bard to meet,
Then he'd malign them secretly
The opportunity is flown.
The poet's madness? for 'tis hard
There dwells five versts from Krasnogory,
The unaffected traits she now
The venerable dame opined
Thou too farewell, my liberty!
The ruts of his own fatherland.
These take their seats; the coach of state
These to the coach of state are bound,
The verst posts catch the vacant eye
The vile seducer shall not dare
Three flasks of wine he might exhaust.
Time-honoured Kremlin's keys present.
The snow descends and buries all,
Time was, his raillery was gay,
Thou beauteous sky above, farewell!
Time was the flattering voice of fame,
'Tis noisome to her there: in thought
'Tis now the hillock now the rill
'Tis time to marry her, 'tis true,
"To-morrow's dawn will glimmer gray,
To arid selfishness resigned,
To-morrow before break of day,
To-morrow Tania we will show,
To accompany him and to escort
To all she answers cruelly—
To ask her name the trouble took.76
To ask forgiveness seemed to yearn;
To bid the gentlefolk good-bye.
To bring behind: the triple steeds
To captivate her how devoted!
To clank the spur, delight the fair—
To cock the pistol; barrel bend
To consanguineous dinners they
To flight before her radiant look,
To find in gossip such delight,
To friendship making no pretence,
To happiness contributing.
To her an elegy composed.
To make wise men the idiot play
To pass the night at home hath gone.
To say farewell, and fussed and fumed
To see his Olga ere the fray—
To strike imagination serve.
To this arrangement can be seen,
To treat the matter as a jest,
Triumphant with the answer come.
'Twas eve. 'Twas dusk. The river speeds
Two dressed in uniform appear—
Two hearts perchance were desolate
Two pines have joined their tangled roots,
To jest as he had done last eve,
To Lucifer the cock must breathe
To mention the foregoing eve,
Took aim—but as immediately
took up his quarters in the Kremlin, but on the 16th had to
To mark with a contemptuous smile.
To Olga Petoushkova darts:
To stay the maid against her will.
Turned and replied as it behoved,
Undoubtedly, disdain alone
Unto the windmill he must ride
Upon the meadows showering,
Use subterfuge, and thus his breast
verst-posts with milestones and substitute a graveyard for
Was the old and forgotten coach;
travel with every necessary of life, and, in the case of the
Undeviating and insane
Unto the gates the servants fly
VII
VIII
Was not surprised thereby at all.
Well nigh her heart in twain was cleft.
Was with himself dissatisfied.
wealthy, all its luxuries following in their train. As the
When all around the entrance pressed,
Whene'er across the plain at speed
When tea was brought. 'Tis my delight
When to enlarge we shall succeed,
Where turmoil cannot penetrate,
Whereto in language courteous
Where youth the proper rhyme is fleetness?
Which o'er the waters boldly leap,
White Moscow raises her old spires,
Whither and wherefore do I speed
"Who? Is it that stout general, pray?"—
Whom thirty centuries adore.
To raise his pistol to his eye,
To see aught—never mind meanwhile
To seek him out with bended head.
To the abandoned dwelling-place.
To sketch ye in Albano's style.60
To Tania Lenski; Kharlikova,
To the youth Eugene hurried now—
To the assembly her they bear.
To the pianoforte he moves
To visit Moscow in the season.
Triumphs—their own or those of friends—
True friend, landlord benevolent,
To the young girl he said adieu,
Unto a carping world must show—
V
Vanished his youthful years at last,
VIII
Was the first question Olga made,
Was the sad poet filled with gloom,
Trembles at artificial shame.
Unto the fields she makes her way,
VI
Well! just as she was yesterday.
Where dwelt the Muses' worshipper,
When I yon semicircle bright
Where my days in the wilderness
Where shining runs the tiny brook,
which are surmounted by a golden cross. At the time of sunset they
Whose countless golden crosses glow
To two young oaks the coachman leads.
To understand by slow degrees
To visit, lovely maid, return,
Tranquil he lay, and strange to view
Troy's sages should in concert own
Tranquil repose. Eugene alone
Unfavourable unto her.
unfriendly critic.
Unto Anicia for the keys
Unto the hero of this lay
Upon her cheek by adulation
Upon his couch insensibly;
Upon the tumbled sofa placed,
Upon those margins she perceived
Up to the attic, and all need
V
VI
Upon a soul inert and cloyed?—
Us, and like Trojan warriors slay us;
VII
Vladimir closes up his book,
"Vladimir Lenski lies beneath,
Vladimir's property, a man
vol. i. p. 33: "My fur cloak flew open, the cold seemed to
Wafted upon poetic wing,
Wallow, my friends, in company!
Was famous for thick-headedness.
What agitation languidly
"What! Grandison?"—"Yes, certainly!"
What sad emotions o'er me steal
What say you? to the family—
When deaf and silent he doth lie
When first upon my cheek I feel
When in the study's calm retreat,
When motionless your gaze beneath
Where thine equal shall we find?
Whilst on the floor Monsieur Triquet
Whom pale Diana's ray illumes—
Will be absorbed by Lethe's stream;
Within his sledge the stiffened corse,
Was sleeping then a sleep like death;
Was wont with me at cards to play.
Was withered ere the morning light—
We glide along a floor of wax.
Well, if your pistol ball by chance
We Russians, friends from distant parts
"What ails thee?"—"Nothing."—He is fled.
"What can be done? She is no child!"
What will the coming dawn reveal?
when he was frostbitten whilst sledging in Russia. He says
When hope's delightful flower but bloomed
When in the grand saloon was heard
Where better?
Where harsh frivolity proclaims
Where man is not.
which a Russian hostess will turn her house topsy-turvy for
Which is he? or an imitation,
Which rankled in Tattiana's breast,
Whither two neighbouring dames have walked
Who can help loving mother Moscow?
Who had for four long years survived
Whom autocratic fate's decrees
"Why did you leave last night so soon?"
Who thrives this moment as I write,
Who to surrender did not blench
"Who would have thought it? As of yore!
Will not five centuries exceed
Winter's approach she doth not hail
With ardent sighs and flattery
With better half as cumbersome;
With blessings on the ditches and
With eye precise and without fail.
With his exasperated sense,
With it may be a couple more;
Within its wave the sounding pail,
With jest and gossip gaily blent.
With lengthened howl and accent loud,
With many a vacancy, 'tis said."—
With pungent or obtuse retort,
Within that secret court discussed,
With lovers' rubbish filled, was neat
With Olga; nor of this appeared
with the plot of this poem, that it was by this road that he
With tumult or contentment still
With worldly honours, it may be,
When the hour came to bid good-bye—
When the mazurka used to peal,
Where the first time she met with him.
Which Autumn late to earth consigned,
Which in a hilly neighbourhood
Which in your spirit dominates,
Wherein a space Oneguine spent.
Where in the country Eugene yet,
Which in the winter were a joy:
Which of approaching labour tells
Whilst from her countenance ne'er stirred
Whilst struggling for the heritage.
Whither departed is the host?
Who by a haughty word or glance
Who dressing-gown and slippers gives
Who early died a gallant death,"
Whose memories make the heart beat quick
Who with a scuffle and a shout
With bated breath, around she bends
Who tyrannizes us with ease,
With epigrams impertinent,
with effigies of the great Napoleon.
With flame more ardent passion burns,
With folded arms and eyes bent low,
With great delight.—O God on high!
With her they did associate,
With measured step and even gait
With pallid light, but Eugene lay
With mute appeal to ask they seem—
Without participation hears,
With scandal's trivial ornament.
With thoughts of a far distant land,
Would agitate a mystic wreath
XII
Wrapt in oblivion complete,
Written 1827-1828 at Moscow, Mikhailovskoe, St. Petersburg
written at Moscow.
X
XIV
XIX
X
XI
XI
XII
XIII
XIII
XIV
XIX
XL
XL
XLVI
XVI
XLI
XLI
XLII
XLIII
XLIV
XLIV
XLV
XLVII
XV
XVII
XVIII
XX
XX
XXI
XXI
XXII
XXIII
XXIV
XXIX
XXVI
XXVII
XXVIII
XXX
XXX
XXXI
XXXII
XXXIII
XXXIV
XLII
XLII
XLIII
XLIII
XLIV
XLIX
XLVIII
XV
XVI
XVII
XVIII
XXII
XXIV
XXV
XXIII
XXVI
XXIX
XXV
XXVII
XXVIII
XXXI
XXXII
XXXIII
XXXIV
XXXIV
XXXIX
XXXIX
Like a Bacchante in her sport
Like a true Frenchman, couplets wrought
Like Leonora did she ride79
Like rotten leaves by Autumn strown—
Like you and me and all the rest?—
List! the snow crunches—he draws nigh!
Lo! from the nearest barrack came,
Longtime her mind is occupied.
Longtime was her heart desolate
Lo! in my garden was she found
Long listen, comprehend the whole
Long tortured by his lay divine,
Lo, the ambassador who speaks
Lo! the prim cat upon the stove
Madame de Stael, Bichat, Tissot:
Manzoni, Herder and Chamfort,85
Marmontel also, tome the third;
may thus be discovered.
Meeting you in times past by chance,
Meet punishment for him provide.
"Mine!" cried Eugene with savage tone.
More timid than a doe long chased,
'Mid worldly pleasures chased him yet,
Motionless, mute, tight-laced and trim.
Mournful Love's deadly trace appears
Mute glances interchanged aside
My days of life approach their end,
Mysteriously all objects near
No answer! He another sent.
Noblesse and models of the mode,
No coquetry was there, I vouch—
No, ever to behold your face,
None the conviction could withstand
No one appeared to lend a hand.
Nor almanacs nor newspapers,
Nor from the mob polite estranged,
Note 48: The "kibitka," properly speaking, whether on wheels
Note 49: The allusions in the foregoing stanza are in the first
Note 55: Lel, in Slavonic mythology, corresponds to the Morpheus
Note 50: The Russian clergy are divided into two classes:
Note 51: Refers to the "Sviatki" or Holy Nights between Christmas
Note 52: During the "sviatki" it is a common custom for the girls
Note 53: The superstition is that the name of the future husband
Note 54: See Note 30.
Note 56: "Malvina," a romance by Madame Cottin.
Note 77: Many will consider this mode of bringing the canto
Note 78: This touching scene produced a lasting impression on
Note 79: See Note 30, "Leonora," a poem by Gottfried Augustus
Note 80: A romance by Maturin.
Note 82: Tchatzki, one of the principal characters in Griboyedoff's
Note 84: On Palm Sunday the Russians carry branches, or used to
Not high in general estimation;
Not knowing its interpretation,
Not to behave as he did once—
Nought but of dinners a long row,
Now a long branch itself entwined
Long ago?"—"'Tis the second year."
Lo! through the frozen windows play
Made me so tipsy long ago!
manufactured in the vicinity of the river Don.
More blooming than the Boreal flame
"My chum lives here," Bruin grunts out.
Nor Byron, Walter Scott, nor Seneca,
Nor dares the skirting of her dress
Nor the Journal des Modes, I vouch,
Nor precepts sage nor pictures e'en,
Note 57: The above three lines are a parody on the turgid
Oneguine—take him up again—
Of all the guests within his mind.
Of the Tattiana of times fled.
Oppressor of the wretched poor;
Or e'en the "Demon" of my strain.81
Nor sudden turned she red or white,
Nor yet her lip compressed did bite.
No signs of trouble her accused,
Note 81: The "Demon," a short poem by Pushkin which at its first
Not the least trace Oneguine sees
Nurses who scream and babes who bleat.
Of diplomats and warlike beaux
Oneguine could not now submit,
Or monster of Satanic pride,
Not, and a flood of bitter tears
Note 59: The Donskoe Champanskoe is a species of sparkling wine
Now buffoon, glutton, and a bore.
Now for the first time I my Muse
O'erwhelmed with guests; by families
Note 58: Pushkin calls Bouyànoff his cousin because he is a
No time to pick it up! afraid,
Of such a dread hallucination.
Now the sweet little shoes she wore,
O epic Muse, my powers increase
Of affectation innocent,
of the Latins. The word is evidently connected with the verb
Of woods and fields the calm retreat,
Of a heart cold and cynical?
Of a most mournful episode,
Of migratory gipsy hordes—
Of "comme il faut." Shishkòff, forgive!
Oh! I accept. And instantly
Of frantic laughter, and all eyes
Oneguine lightning glances shot;
On such a day. O Heavens, 'tis she!
Or suffering pride? Why is he there?
O triumphs of my guileless days,
Oneguine sat the table by
Or a good fellow for the nonce,
Or other mask donned playfully?
Other and colder thoughts affright,
Our godlike tongue she could exchange
Our misanthrope was full of ire,
Page after page continued reading,
Passes the torrent But alack!
Maidens before her meekly move
Men opposite. The cross they sign
My pen no longer finds delight,
My sportive Muse I used to take
None could a trace of that impute,
None could her beautiful declare,
Note 83: Shishkòff was a member of the literary school which
Of London life is "vulgar" called
Of my light paramour was proud.
Of old maids the divinity,
Passion's wild sway I then allowed,
Perched on a goose's neck a skull
Perverse, unfavourable views?
Philanthropist or patriot,
Petòushkoff, the provincial swell;
Pink as Palm Sunday cherubim,84
Plates, knives and forks are clattering
Please her by their decorum fixed,
Pray is it he? It is the same.
poems are stiff and formal in style and are not much thought of
Prevailed at last. She in reply
Professions eagerly for deeds,
Pursuits I followed of the crowd,
Pushkin belonged. He was admiral, author, and minister of
Pushkin's mind. It took place at a public examination at
Pushkin, the poet's uncle.
Raven, snowstorm, tempest, fog,
reigns of Catherine the Second and Alexander the First. His
Remained with him the youthful maid.
Renowned for his acumen, wit,
Reserved, but not inanimate,
reward and protection, owing to the backward state of the empire.
Right opposite Tattiana placed,
Rooted unto the spot remained.
Saint Priest, who every album's page
Recovering, Tania gazes round;
Returning, from his ship amid
Reveillez-vouz, belle endormie.
Rogue and extortioner of yore,
Said something in an undertone
same title upon which Rubinstein's new opera, "Il Demonio," is
Seek the forgotten countenance
She gazed around her—it was day.
She on the apparition gazed,
She peeped through a chink of the door.
Sang childhood's pastimes and its joy,
Scarce to her questions he responds,
Seductive cup of love, whose flow
Selfish nonentities around?
Sharp rows of tushes, bony claws,
She brought with her the gift of song.
She calm and unconcerned appears.
She cannot draw a breath or stir.
She cannot—Eugene oped the door
She consolation thence obtained—
She cannot—then impatiently
She dreamt she journeyed o'er a field
She led me through nocturnal mist
She sank upon the snow. But Bruin
She, than the morning moon more pale,
She visited the humble tents
Sits down and gazes on all sides—
Some marriageable maids behold,
She got a book of nursery tales,
She hears the bear behind her press,
She leisurely away doth ride,
She runs, the bear upon her trail,
She strains her throat to force a cry—
She, to turn back her eyes afraid,
Sit many monstrous shapes abhorred.
So there will be a dance to-night.
"So thou art wed! I did not know.
Spanned the unbridled torrent o'er;
Spite of herself with Lenski's lot
She muses: "What was Olga's fate?
She nerves herself from her alarm
Shouts, laughter, jamming 'gainst the wall,
Society he duped enow."
So she her silken sash unlaced,
Stanza II properly concludes with this line, the remainder having
Sterner solicitudes engage,
Stiff, overstarched and insolent,
Sits by her gloomily, desponds,
Still doth the misanthrope appear?
Still for ever fare thee well.'—Byron
St. Petersburg, Boldino, Tsarskoe Selo, 1880-1881
style of Lomonossoff, a literary man of the second Catherine's
Swift following in her wake, the sun,"57
Tania well nigh expired when he
Straight for the entrance then he made
Straight from their province had he come?"—
Struck Lenski dead—across the scene
Submissive as if in a swoon,
Tall, slender, like thy form designed,
Surely you know him as I speak;
Swearing how Lenski he would rile,
Tails which a bushy tuft adorns,
Tania the meaning would obtain
Tattiana courage doth regain
Tattiana every day conferred
The Làrinas were since sunrise
Tattiana to the index flies
That crass stupidity misleads,
That mediocrity alone
That mind which yearns for space is bound?
That we by cant ourselves deceive,
The dream left terror in its train.
The words bear, bridge, fir, darkness, bog,
Though the foul vision promise made
Tattiana finds in loneliness.
Tattiana in despair unfeigned
Tattiana motionless abides.
Tattiana nurse the project planned
Tattiana o'er the stream complained;
Tattiana's trouble might have spied,
Tattiana purchased with a stray
Terror assails her. Hastily
Tattiana terrified awoke.
Tattiana to a corner, bids
Tattiana would attempt to fly,
That our desires which noblest seemed,
That we her constantly betrayed
The bear rolls on with many a grunt:
Terror of guardians of the night;
That first the Muse appeared to me.
That Nina's marble symmetry,
The brilliant Nina Voronskoi,
The fire of the nocturnal lights;
The guests make room; aside each takes
The friends are called and quickly placed.
The hours once more Oneguine counts,
The husband comes and interferes
The Muse revealed her first delight,
That girl—but he must dreaming be—
That girl whom once on a time he
The bard's enthusiastic strain,
The butt of scandal having been,
The crowd doth head and shoulders rise
That I forget not whom I sing.
The chief of the Chaldean wise,
The company deep silence guard.
The doors swing open: Lenski makes
Their branches by the snow bowed down.
The neighbours come, in sledge approach,
The general who accompanies.
The Great World
The maid whose note he still possessed
The old man who has had his freaks,
The Princess N. will be at home
The Neva's Cleopatra, and
The old Derjavine noticed me,
The purest of the dreams we dreamed,
There came a sudden flash of light,
There is no path; the storm hath strewn
The rigour of cold pride and all
The seemly crowd, partaking nought
The shining orbs of night appear;
They sat, but conversation's flow
This must not be confounded with Lermontoff's poem bearing the
the Tempter. It is descriptive of the first manifestation of
The traveller, bird of passage he,
The twenty-sixth year of his age,
The wood she enters—bear behind,—
This monument of thought profound
Though he surveyed her at his ease,
Though late, have a beginning made.77
Through aspens, limes and birches bare,
That my coy Muse might sing more sweet.
The captain of a company.
The colonel sent it. Oh! delight!
The door flew open—Olga came,
The family of Kharlikoff,
The hero we immortalize.
The maids beside Tattiana keep—
The men salute with lower bows
The military band will play.
The conversation was revived
The lady in the crimson cap
The lady's glance upon him fell—
the Lyceum, on which occasion the boy poet produced a poem. The
"Then come with me." The prince proceeds,
Then my companions young with pleasure
Then, the far capital forgot,
The poor girl fell into a faint,
The prince's eye Oneguine seeks:
There an imperious skeleton;
There was no angling for success.
The speech of man and tramp of horse.
The strife grew furious and Eugene
The two friends' compliments she hears
The troop of apparitions fled,
The unbidden guests he roughly chides—
They first of all my brow did wreathe
They hand in hand to table go.
They talked and laughed. The guests arrived.
Those hellish phantoms. Peals arise
Though dazzling its effulgence white,
Through dense aristocratic rows
Thus haughty, careless in her tone?
'Tis fearful to anticipate
Till amid trees a hovel showed,
'Tis dreadful—ye agree, I hope—
'Tis silent all. Tattiana sleeps.
Titles and ages intermixed.
to a conclusion of more than doubtful taste. The poet evidently
To banish far unworthy themes
To classicism I've homage paid,
Together moments one or two
To God eternal hymns of praise.
To help her to the other shore
To lay two covers secretly.
"To—?"—"Làrina."—"Tattiana?"—"So.
To light had brought them from their dust,
To look on life as on a show,
"to lull."
The wind rose instantly, blew out
They laugh, they argue, and they bawl,
They shout and no one lists at all.
To many a noisy feast and fight,
Tome of "Malvina," and but three56
To our Tattiana conquering,
To pass with reasonable men
To raise a clamour and a din:
To tragedy, the fainting fit,
Transfixed Oneguine mine doth stay.
Triquet arose, and for the bard
Trembling he seeks the young princess—
Triumphant by anticipation,
Turned to her and discordantly
'Twas then in valleys lone, remote,
Two poles together glued by ice,
Undressed herself and went to bed
'Twould serve ye in an epigram—
Unhappily too salt by far;
Unknown to all he doth appear,
Until her powers of running fail.
Unto her husband, went away—
Unto their solitude one day,
Unto the sounding sea to list,
Upon my visions such intrude.
V
Variety of speech and vests,
Vexation? Vanity? or strove
VI
Visions, now sad, now grateful, long
visits of a "demon." Russian society was moved to embody this
VIII
"Warm yourself here a little space!"
VII
Was uttered, and the cabin shook—
Where every day before his eyes
Who arrived lately from Tamboff,
Whom you in slumber may have seen."
With effort she restrains. Well nigh
With Eugene pranks of former years
Vociferously paid her court,
Voices and hands applaud, and she
Wearied of leisure in the end,
What doth he act? Is it Melmoth,80
What doth she see? Around the board
What hath he dreamed? What hath occurred?
What is his latest character?
When in that company she saw
Where all upon the surface lies,—
Wherein the heart its vows expressed,
Where Nereids murmur evermore,
which original genius, emancipated from the strait-waistcoat of
Whilst he "belle Nina" had the face
Who from two years to thirty tell;
Who to the youthful hostess bowed,
Whiskers and bloody tongues and horns,
With all their progeny were there,
Who with the Spanish envoy speaks?"—
With boiling torrent dark and gray;
With book in hand reclined in bed,
With clouded brow stands silently?
Within her; she is sick at heart;
With me Caucasian rocks beside!
Without profession, business, wife,
Wherefore regarding him express
Which in the elevated sphere
Who dreams expound and prophecies.
Who glory, wealth and dignities
Who may he be? Is it Eugene?
With blunted pencil-point adorns.
With footsteps tremulous with awe
X
With fir-trees standing motionless
Within resounded shriek and shout:
With jealous fear, anxiety.
With loud explosion, the bright wine
With Martin Zadeka. In woe
Without disgust we look upon?
With roses, caps and looks malign;
With tranquil air Oneguine leads
X
XI
With us 'tis quite a novelty
XI
XII
XII
With purple hand Aurora leads,
With this unpleasant tête-à-tête,
XIII
XIV
XIX
XV
XVI
XIII
XIV
XIX
XLI
XV
XVI
XVII
XVII
XVIII
XVIII
XX
XXI
XX
XXI
XXII
XXII
XXIII
XXIII
XXIV
XXIV
XXIX
XXV
XXV
XXVIII
XXX
XXXI
XXXII
XXXIII
XXXIX
XXVI
XXVII
XXXV
XXXVI
XXXVII
XXXVIII
Ye dreams of heavenly poesy?
Ye golden days of my young spring?
Yelping, a pack of dogs rush out,
Ye men of fashion cynical,
Note 85: Owing to the unstable nature of fame the names of some
Not the young timid maid, believe,
Nought in the universe refused:
occasions.
Of clarinet or flute doth cry:
Of sunset glow with rosy light,
of the above literary worthies necessitate reference at this
of cherubs with the ruddy complexions of tradition. Hence the
Of fashionable dames the foe,
Of the imperial Neva's shore.
Of his approach; but nothing cared
Oh, how her lips compressed restrain
Old age through spectacles too peers,
Of lackeys in her pathway grouped,
of useless drones for whom Peter the Great felt such a deep
Of your perfections in my soul,
O Men, how very like ye are
Omens inspired her soul with fear,
Oneguine's cheek grew ashy pale,
Oneguine wasted; on my word,
On melted wax in water poured;
Oneguine's Letter to Tattiana
On sunny days the glistening rime,
Or a swift hare from mead to mead
Or a swift meteor, may be,
Or did her tears soon cease to flow?
Or he dispersed the motley crowd
Or recognized not in the crowd.
or runners, is a vehicle with a hood not unlike a big cradle.
Our paradise is no more sweet.
period in the nineteenth century.
Perusing Gibbon and Rousseau,
Possession hath no power to please,
Placed in a sledge his terrier black,
Presentiments oppressed her heart.
Received him freely at her house,
priests, and the black who inhabit the monasteries, furnish
repugnance.
Sailed silently in unison—
Sledging, the snows, which at the time
Or to pick up her kerchief stooped.
pessni," or "dish songs" before mentioned. These are popularly
place to a poem entitled "The First Snow," by Prince Viazemski
Remained unnoticed. Once he went
ring. The first-named lines foreshadow death; the latter, the
Secret excursions made in sleighs;
She will not see, she will not hear.
So be it! But internal strife
supposed to indicate the fortunes of the immediate holder of the
Tattiana certainly infers
Tattiana in the yard appears
Tattiana in traditions old
Restrained the impulses of youth;
Rings from a dish of water full
She mourned and to the moon would raise
She deemed its outline might afford.
She trembled and grew deadly pale.
Tattiana gazed with curious eye
Tattiana loved as when a lad,
The clue unto some mystery
Suddenly to the left hand side,
That guests approach: and when above
The artifice of villany—
The crystals of her vestibule
The peasants there are rich as kings,
The girl on tiptoe forward bounds
There was no doubt! Eugene, alas!
These evenings as in days of old
The solstice of our earthly years,
They shovel silver with a spade,
The misty evenings ere Twelfth Night.
This separated us as well—
Though I'll return to him right early,
To end with him her path below.
to assemble around a table on which is placed a dish or basin of
To Love all ages lowly bend,
The languid eye of love-sick maids,
The new moon's crescent slim she spied,
The remnant destiny concedes,
The sad moon only could remark.
The serpent to unlawful trees
The wondrous host of heavenly spheres
This, this were true felicity!
To arm the tongue and e'en the eye,
To be in conversation clear
To Eve the universal mother,
To follow you in every place,
To peer into the future tries.
She seemed of him oblivious,
Society endures not such!
That I to you reveal my mind?
Sickness more courage doth command
The fever of the blood to slake—
The Làrinas would celebrate,
Still hopes, endeavours, though in vain.
The servants used to congregate
the white or secular, which is made up of the mass of parish
Tattiana—thus the sex is born.—
Than health, so with a trembling hand
the high dignitaries of the Church, and constitute that swarm
Though correspondence as a rule
Thus her perversity hath shown.
Thus Nature doth our souls alloy,
To bear love's parching agonies—
To swathe her shoulders in the furs,
To write his forefathers to warn
Twelfth Night approaches. Merry eves!51
Unknown to all, without a tie,
To burn, yet reason keep awake
To mutter her concealed desire
To watch with lovers' ecstasies,
To what malicious merriment,
Unless forbidden fruit we eat,
V
'Twas he whom, amid nightly shades,
VI
VII
VIII
Warmth I imagined in your glance,
water which contains a ring. Each in her turn extracts the ring
When thoughtless youth whom nothing grieves,
Wherefore? She found a secret joy
What acrimonious scorn I trace
What do I ask? What cause assigned
"What is your name?" The boor looked dazed,
When in her walks abroad she met
Wholly beside herself with fear,
Will sound an insult in your ear.
"Within him daily see the the fires of punch and war,
Where is the outlaw, banned by men,
Which crushing dignity must brook!
Will happiness replace. My God!
With childlike lisp will lie to please.
Whilst Morpheus his approach delays,
With hisses Cleopatra scares,
Who would the maiden innocent
With all dissatisfaction shows.
With hurried hand smooths down his hair.
Within his mind Tattiana bore,
With one foot resting on its tip
With late repentance gnaws and stings.
With one paw strokes her face and purrs,
With Ozeroff was wont to share
With sad refrain misfortune near.
With taffety instead of crape.
With which blind Fortune oft betrays
With words of foreign origin
Would haste in agitation dire
Would loiter by the looking-glass,
Wrapped in their sheepskins soundly sleep.
Society renounced once more.
Some Russian authors he perused—
The first appearance of the snows
The indignation of her heart!
Then in the silent cabinet
The time when Melancholy's claw
To an assembly—she appeared
Upon her brow sits wrath alone—
Tattiana, Russian to the core,
They are all natural and low,
Though deep he sinks into the drift;
'Tis hopeless! Homeward doth he flee
To freeze his finger hath begun,
Well known unto Oneguine mine.
The die is cast! Thine is my life!
The misanthrope of gloomy brow,
The Russian winter did adore
To labour in his sledge forgot,
Wherein I castigation get;
Which lessons unto us repeat,
Winter! The peasant blithely goes
With affectation,—nothing more.
With an imagination wild,
With blood instead of ink she scrawled,
With cherries, red currants,
With dance and with song.
With deeper woe than others' grief.
With gay design and silken stitch.
When he in ardent verse portrays
Where, where, remorse, compassion, pain?
Where, where, the trace of tears? None, none!
With bitter tears my mother prayed,
With hopeless passion: from her bed
With many a snare their pathway line!
With him were friends eternally:
Without them Eugene is complete;
With self, society, existence, discontent,
With his ferocious mate appears.
With his own pawn alas! his rook!
With serious air then went away
With hope and then perplexity,
With humble prose I'll fill my page
With inexact pronunciation
Within his memory there lay,
Would at the proper time appear.
X
XI
Within my memory I bore
With intellect and strong volition
With its exhilarating flow,
Without a chance to slip away.
With our Oneguine doth aspire
Without constraint in conversation
Without the least constraint he bowed.
With quite a lachrymose expression
With rapturous longing he awaits,
With smiling face he Lenski hears;
With tenderness hath recognized
XLII
With us is easily attained.
Writ in my honour now and then—
X
XII
XIII
XIV
With "vale" finish off a note;
work is entitled, "Ideas for a Philosophy of the History of
Would soothe the doubtings of his soul,
XI
XL
XLI
XLIII
XLIX
XII
XIII
XIX
XIV
XIX
XL
XLVI
XLI
XLIV
XLV
XLVIII
XV
XL
XL
XLV
XV
XLIX
XLVI
XLVII
XLVII
XVI
XVII
XVII
XVIII
XLVIII
XVI
XVIII
XX
XX
XXI
XXI
With intellect, a taste refined,
With iridescent wing doth flap
With jealous fire resuscitate,
With little knowledge and that wrong
With love which happiness extends;
With laughter smothered weariness:
Without amaze or wrath displayed:
Without disguise ourselves explain.
Without enthusiasm he met
Without the faintest trace to leave
With raspberries, cherries.
With satisfaction marvellous,
With so much warmth and intellect?
With such a perversity proclaim.
Would she the canvas tight enrich
X
XI
With spiritual tenderness;
With what avidity and zest
would have been amongst us still. He was four years younger
Would she in silence long remain.
Would whisper: shall I so long live?"—
Would you to me this Phyllis show,
XII
XIII
XIV
XL
XL
XLI
XLII
XLII
XLIII
XLIII
XLIV
XV
Without grammatical mistakes.
With shame I shudder and with dread—
Would lose his slippers or gazette.
Would once in powdered wig appear;
XI
X
XVI
XVII
XXI
XXII
With thee I conversed when I bore
With the epistle of my fair;
With this immoderate request
work entitled "Les trois Irlandais Conjures, ou l'ombre d'Emmet,"
XII
XIII
XIV
XLI
XV
XXIII
XXIII
Without the ken of parents both,
With sudden flush her cheeks suffuse,
With tears, confused emotions, bliss,—
With tears which secret sufferers love—
With the "Well-Wisher" in her hand!40
With unanimity complete,
XIX
XVI
XIX
XVII
XVIII
XVIII
XX
XX
XXI
XXII
XXII
XXII
XXIII
XXIII
XXIV
XXIV
XXIV
XXIV
XXIX
XXIX
XXIX
XXIX
XXIX
XXV
XXV
XXV
XXV
XXVI
XXVI
XXVII
XXVI
XXVI
XXVI
XXVII
XXVIII
XXVIII
XXX
XXVII
XXVIII
XXX
XXX
XXXI
XXXI
XXXI
XXXII
XXXII
XXXIII
XXXIII
XXXIV
XXVII
XXVII
XXVIII
XXVIII
XXX
XXX
XXXI
XXXI
XXXII
XXXII
XXXII
XXXIII
XXXIII
XXXIII
XXXIV
XXXIV
XXXIV
XXXIV
XXXIX
XXXIX
XXXIX
XXXIX
XXXIX
XXXVII
XXXV
XXXV
XXXV
XXXVI
XXXVI
XXXVI
XXXVII
XXXVIII
Yes! every one must have his foes,
Yea! although rendered beauteous
Yes! for our unpretending home,
Yes, happy—though she at his side
Yet curses on his fate bestowing,
Yet sometimes pages two or three
You fall in love again. But still—
XXXV
XXXV
XXXV
XXXV
XXXVI
XXXVI
XXXVI
XXXVI
XXXVII
XXXVII
XXXVII
XXXVII
XXXVII
XXXVIII
XXXVIII
XXXVIII
XXXVIII
XXXVIII
XXXVIII
Yawning betook him to a pen.
Years to light rhyme themselves oppose,
Yea! and a man of honour, lo!
Years have inclined me to stern prose,
Ye billows of blue Hadria's sea,
Ye feel but little interest,
Ye groves whose depths I know so well,
Ye mothers also, caution use,
Ye need dissimulation base
Yet clearer shines than every light
"Ye peaceful valleys all, good-bye!
Ye shadows of a life more high,
Yet dares not, dedicate its strain,
Yet ghastlier, yet more wonderful,
Yet let us part in friendship, O
Yet neither Virgil nor Racine
Yet on a frosty winter day
Ye miracles of courtly grace,
Yet as a rule their talk I call
Yet I in idleness expend
Yet satiated with success,
Yet sometimes banished hopes will rise
Yet still apparently aspire
Yet still her heart, which torments tear,
Yet still of anecdotes a treasure
Yet suffering emotional
Yet viewing her from head to foot,
Yet with a feigned frigidity
Yet still remains the old despair.
Ye well-known mountain summits high,
Yonder the household lad doth run,
Yet sometimes this or that deceit
Yet was her inmost soul o'erjoyed
Yon silly moon upon the brink
You choose."—"But who is she?"—"My wife."
"You have a letter to me sent.
You, he a noble mind disclosed,
You in the least commiserate
You know that I am now a fool—
You'll find her portrait there, I vouch;
You'll spend your winter famously!
You never since your nose have shown.
You never would have heard the name,
Young ladies' faces and their feet.
Young ladies, if ye ever strove
Young ladies in a vasty curve,
Your magic voices I shall greet,
Youth freshens beneath Passion's showers,
You will not all abandon me.
Zaretski rose, nor would explain,
Young maidens, fair maidens,
You o'er your wine insulted hath—
Your conversation cold and hard,
"Your fashionable world I hate,
Your frankness I shall compensate
Your heart possesses, I know well,
Your innocent and charming note
"Your second you have left behind!"
Your smiling lips, your beaming eyes,
You with stern countenance declare
Zaretski and Monsieur Guillot
Zaretski bit his lip in wrath,
Zaretski paces thirty-two
Zaretski shouted: "Why, he's killed!"—
Your steed, though rough-shod, cannot keep
youthful Parny see Note 42. Derjavine flourished during the
Zaretski, once a bully bold,
Zaretski, village mechanician,
Zaretski with a knowing grin,
Zizi, thou mirror of my mind,
